t 226 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

work ethic

The ideological, cultural and
social expectations attached to
the performance of work. Max
Weber thought the Protestant
work ethic was an important
cultural ingredient in the
gradual emergence of a rational
capitalism that he associated
with modernity. See work.

LO2 Describe how
the labour process
has evolved from
early industrialisation
through to Fordism
and post-Fordism

labour process

The sequential organisation of
work and machinery. In
industrial society, automation,
technological change and the
specialisation of tasks have
transformed the labour process
and its managerial control. See
division of labour.

work ethic) and acquisition came from the rise of particular Protestant sects
(Calvinism being the most important), which emphasised religious predestination
that encouraged observers to defer pleasure, to work hard and to save (Weber 1995:
98-128). Weber believed that this cultural-religious shift was a necessary factor in the
development of an ‘ideology’ consistent with an expansion of rational capitalism,
bureaucratic efficiency and the modern work ethic (Weber 1995: 181). Weber’s
insights draw attention to the obsession with work in Western societies, where a
strong work ethic still dominates Western culture. In the modern process of socialisa-
tion, schooling has replaced religion as the institution responsible for instilling a cor-
rect work ethic into pupils.

lM THE LABOUR PROCESS AFTER THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

Defining the labour process

The labour process describes how work is performed and organised. In contempo-
rary industrial societies, work organisation is subject to continuous change. Work
organisation has been subject to two related forces: the pressure of producing goods
and services for money (and wages); and the discipline of producing goods and serv-
ices within a fixed time period (Tilly & Tilly 1998: 30-2). The disciplines of time and
money were major achievements of the industrial revolution. The modern factory,
with its complex, centralised and disciplined labour process, became the symbol of
this emerging capitalist system.

There are a number of reasons why the factory represented a fundamental change
in work organisation. First, factory organisation encouraged an ever more efficient
division of labour, driven by the search for profit. Second, factory work started the
long process of replacing artisanal forms of production in which skilled workers had
controlled conditions of work, forms of the craft and output (see Boissonnade 1937:
220). Third, factories depended on the centralisation of workplaces, which in turn
promoted the growth of larger metropolises.

Technology is instrumental to this modern form of work organisation. Successive
technological changes in power, machinery and transportation yielded unprecedented
increases in productivity and output. At the same time, new technologies reinforced the
growing division of labour and specialisation of labour tasks. Adam Smith ([1776] 1976)
had famously used the example of a pin factory—where work was further specialised
and separated into routine and repetitive functions—to show how a technical division
of labour could increase efficiency. However, Smith understood equally that this kind of
work organisation would have alienating effects (see Lamb 1975; West 1975), a recogni-
tion that resurfaced in Marx’s diagnosis of the problems of work under capitalism.
Indeed, new machinery and technology have always incited anxiety among workers over
possible job losses and the loss of control over work. Craft and artisan-based methods
of production, which allowed for some degree of autonomy on the part of craftspeople,
were gradually replaced by methods that required less skill from workers (Tilly & Tilly
1998: 144). Employers find less skilled workers easier and cheaper to replace.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT t 226 )

Taylorism

The new dynamic set in train by these capitalist work methods accelerated in the
20th century. As Weber foresaw, the goal of efficiency attracted greater attention
from experts, who thought that the work process could be rationalised according to
principles of scientific management. In his Principles of Scientific Management,
first published in 1911, US engineer Frederick Taylor argued that managerial
experts could further rationalise work by subjecting workplaces to ‘time and motion’
studies that could speed up production (Taylor 1911; Gillespie 1993: 11-12).

Unionists feared that Taylor’s scientific ‘principles’ would further erode skill
and control over work by ordinary workers, who would be subject to the manage-
rial whims of experts. In the United States and elsewhere, there was a bitter strug-
gle over the implementation of Taylorist methods involving ‘control strikes’ by
unions trying to preserve working conditions (Montgomery 1979: 98-101).
However, the combined force of new technologies and the determination of capi-
talists to reshape their organisations meant that work in major industries under-
went Taylorisation.

Taylorist methods of production represented a major change in industrial society.
They promised greater productivity, but at the cost of rising worker dissatisfaction.
The vision of industrial society advocated by leading capitalists was premised on
workers accepting boring work and alienating environments so long as some benefits
of dramatically increased production were returned in the form of higher wages and
more consumption goods (Cross 1993: 11-12).

Such a goal was at the heart of Henry Ford’s plans to transform the US car industry
and reshape industrial society (Boyer & Morais 1972: 231). Ford understood that to
maintain profitability, production had to increase accordingly. This meant that work-
ers needed to be able to afford to buy cars; in other words, the level of demand (or
workers’ purchasing power) was imperative for expanding profits, and for ensuring
that workers accepted the new work environment.

Fordism, post-Fordism and the ‘new economy’

When sociologists write about Fordism, they broadly describe the characteristics of
industrial change consistent with Henry Ford’s vision of an economic order combin-
ing standardised output, mass workforces of semi-skilled workers and continuous
automation (Aglietta 1979; Lipietz 1987). The vision of Fordist society had its founda-
tions in mass consumption and product standardisation; the ever-expanding range of
consumer goods was supposed to drive economic growth and compensate workers
for their increasingly alienated working lives.

After experiencing its heyday in the aftermath of World War II, Fordism as a social
and economic model eventually began to experience difficulties. The end of the long
postwar economic boom in the 1970s destabilised industrial economies and the
nature of work organisation by threatening profits. This triggered a search for inno-
vative ways to restructure work organisation (Brenner 1998). In order to reduce

scientific management
The managerial philosophy and
technique that promoted
detailed examination of the
workplace to ‘scientifically’
locate efficiency improvements
and industrial change. Unions
considered scientific
Management as a threat to
work satisfaction because it
emphasised managerial control
and the degradation of
workers’ skills.

Fordism

An economic system organised
around mass production and
consumption. In production,
productivity is increased by
rapid automation, long
production lines and removing
labour’s control over the labour
process. In consumption, mass
production enables a rapid
increase in the supply of
affordable consumer goods to
consumers, whose demand
drives further production.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 226 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

post-Fordism

A description of changes to the
labour process and mass
production that stresses the
actual and potential gains from
promoting teamwork, job
satisfaction and a diversification
of the product range (flexible
specialisation). Post-Fordist
production is designed to meet
the consumption patterns of
More discerning wealthy
societies.

labour costs, some manufacturing production shifted from the first world to new
industrialising economies, especially in East Asia. Technical advances in computers,
robotics, transportation and information technology (IT) reduced costs and jobs in
the industries that remained in the advanced industrial economies. The result of this
restructuring has been rapid change in the composition of work within individual
workplaces and industries as a whole.

Taylorist organisation—which underpinned Fordist-style mass production—also
came up against limits of its own making. Worker alienation, which stimulated indus-
trial unrest in Europe, North America and Australia in the late 1960s and 1970s,
reinforced doubts about the long-term stability of the Fordist industrial order. In
their efforts to secure better wages and conditions, organised labour had become
more adept at halting production in large-scale Fordist factories.

While some industries and jobs were relocated out of first-world economies, other
industries and firms responded innovatively to the defects of over-Taylorised indus-
try. In the 1980s, economists and sociologists began to take an interest in develop-
ments in dynamic regional economies—such as in the “Third Italy’, Scandinavia and
Silicon Valley. All had fostered highly specialised, sophisticated and profitable busi-
nesses in industries as diverse as garment production, IT and automotives. A defin-
ing characteristic of these industrial centres was a ‘return to craft production’.
Companies responded to growing demand for quality goods and promoted teams of
workers who would ideally exercise more ‘democratic’ control over production,
including the organisation of tasks. Optimists extrapolated much from these devel-
opments. In their influential book The Second Industrial Divide, Michael Piore and
Charles Sabel (1984: 189-92) argued that ‘post-Fordist’ organisation held out the
possibility of replenishing the skill and satisfaction of work without compromising
profitability. These authors, among others, also argued that this new model would
better meet the growing diversification and sophistication of consumer needs in
advanced societies.

However, this vision of post-Fordism was criticised for its over-optimism. Actual
transformation within advanced economies since the long boom has fallen well
short of these expectations. While some industries followed the post-Fordist
scenario, others underwent severe rationalisation, imposing ‘lean’ methods of pro-
duction that cut workforces and further stressed workers (Moody 1997: 85-116). It
produced another industrial divide between a core group of well-paid, multi-skilled
workers and a peripheral group of ‘precarious’ workers, often contracted on a part-
time or casual basis.

Continuity and change in the labour process

The expansion of a service-based economy is among the most important recent trans-
formations in work associated with the post-Fordist decline in manufacturing jobs
(see Figure 10.1). Many jobs, like cleaning offices or assisting dental procedures or
analysing the share market, seem far removed from the well-studied activities of
manufacturing. But work organisation in the services sector (which is so diverse it

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT t 226 )

Proportion of all employed people in the production and service industries,
US STOR) 71966-2011

80

—— Production industries
—— Service industries

+ 70

+ 60

Po)

Percentage

+ 40

+ 30

Dee eo 2
1966 1989 2011

Year (August)

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (201 1a) Australian Social Trends December 2011, Cat. No. 4102.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

cannot easily be encapsulated) is driven by similar profit-motivated pressures: atten-
tion to task organisation; cost reduction; and labour-saving, work-reshaping
technologies. So, while the types of work and their organisation vary, persistent pres-
sures bear down on all workplaces.

Braverman’s work Labor and Monopoly Capital, first published in 1974, provided
the most powerful defence of Marx’s view that capitalism has progressively ‘degraded’
all forms of work through the processes of automation, managerial control and automation
de-skilling. Braverman studied a number of occupations, including clerical and retail bur by machines —
work, in reaching his conclusions. However, while the pressure created by the drive _ types oftechnology.
for profits on work strongly shapes work organisation, the evolution of work in  ge-skitting
advanced societies has not conformed to any straightforward “de-skilling’ process, the removal ofthe skilled
New labour processes require new skills and different sets of social interaction. Soae a th ataration and
Empirical studies into the skills composition of the workforce suggest that, in aggre- _ echnolagical change.
gate terms, skilled work is not disappearing from advanced economies (Tilly & Tilly
1998: 158-9).

Work has always involved more than dealing with machinery and information. It
also demands skills in managing social relations, and the expansion of a service-based
economy draws further attention to these relations. Feminists have introduced new
ways of understanding how the act of work is socially negotiated by workers. For
example, US sociologist Arlie Hochschild studied how flight attendants cope with pas-
sengers’ needs in her book The Managed Heart, describing how this group of employ-
ees use ‘emotional labour’ to keep passengers happy. In doing so, she poses questions
about how paid work demands the management of our emotions in accomplishing

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 226 AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO3 Explain the nature
of industrial relations
and tensions between
workers and employers

tasks and reaching goals (Hochschild 1983; Hardt & Negri 2000). In Nickel and
Dimed, Barbara Ehrenreich (2001) revealed the demanding emotional and planning
skills required of workers in jobs that are looked down on as ‘low skilled’ when she
worked in low-paid jobs as part of her participant-observation study. She followed up
this book with Bait and Switch, an account of the gruelling emotional efforts required
for self-presentation in searching for middle-management jobs (Ehrenreich 2006).
Ehrenreich revealed that there is much more in common among such different jobs
than is first obvious. Sociologists must always be alert to what different jobs have in
common as well as the changes produced in specific labour processes.

lM WORK, CLASSES AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

So far we have discussed how the composition of work and its organisation have
changed over time, largely in response to the imperatives of profitability and techno-
logical change. The organisation of work has implications for how workers group
together and how they remain separate from each other. When Marx wrote of the
working class (or the proletariat), he meant people employed by capitalists. This group
of workers, Marx argued, were paid a wage for their labour power (or their ability to
work), but not for the full value of their contribution. This led to what Marx claimed
was the exploitation of the working class (see Chapter 2). An awareness of this exploi-
tation would drive workers into conflict with business owners, especially when wages
and conditions were driven down or unemployment rose. Factory workers were struc-
turally positioned to act in collective struggle. These real class conflicts had a major
impact on politics of industrial societies, eventually producing labour movements
(made up of unions) and pressure for greater working-class representation in politics.

Work, class and conflict

Because work matters a great deal to people’s lives and livelihoods, it provides impor-
tant clues about people’s location in the larger social hierarchy called a class structure.
Work also matters to another dimension of class—how workers become aware of
conflicts between people like themselves and the owners of private business (see
Wright 1997: 373-406). This awareness is sometimes called ‘class consciousness’ (see
Chapter 2).

The workplace allows individuals and groups to define collective interests that
emerge out of class consciousness, and to act on these conflicts. These conflicts are
centred in differences in ownership, knowledge and authority (Wright 1997). For
example, workers with few marketable skills have low bargaining power with their
employers, little authority on the job and usually have few alternatives (such as access
to capital to set up their own businesses). By contrast, managers with professional
qualifications may not have access to resources to set up a business, but do possess
skills that command higher wages, are more likely to end up in decision-making
positions and establish powerful networks. When all the differences in people’s
power, skill and ownership in the workplace are considered, we can obtain a picture
of an overall class structure, and how occupation and class fully intersect.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT @

Not everyone is aware of class or even motivated by class interests. But workers
can learn through struggles with owners and managers that their interests differ on
wages, conditions, employment tenure and ideas about running the workplace. The
experience of work is richly social, in which feelings of solidarity help generate class
consciousness. However, the mere fact that people work together in similar jobs,
and do similar tasks across firms, does not automatically mean they will form mean-
ingful collective identities, or that these identities will translate into class-based
action or politics.

However, most sociological research on the workplace accepts that there are inher-
ent work-related collective conflicts in a market economy (Grusky 1994; Wright
1997), even if there have been wide variations in how sociologists have interpreted
these conflicts, how they play themselves out and how they can be resolved. Marxist
and critical thinkers have long emphasised the centrality of class conflict, while other
analysts and commentators maintain that workers can be ‘integrated’ into the mod-
ern workplace. The former have tended to look to trade unions as a main vehicle for
‘acting out’ conflicts, and transforming the workplace and broader society. The latter
adopt the more optimistic perspective and stress the feasibility of managing industrial
tensions. The creation of workplace institutions such as human resources depart-
ments involves attempts to integrate workers and their unions into the firm’s struc-
ture (Braverman 1974: 144-5; Gillespie 1993: 240-63).

Unions and the labour movement

Unions are the main collective organisations of workers. An example ofan Australian unions
union is the Australian Services Union (ASU), which counts childcare workers and arpabaton and vehi
IT staff among its members. Unions have a long history, emerging out of the need for collective action for employees

: : : : ss : in industrial societies. Unions
collective action in the workplace to improve living standards, and assert rights at aromote te collective interest
work and in politics. Unions also educated their members and reinforced solidarity _ oftheirmembership through

: : : : : fepresentation, negotiation and

between workers. Early trade unions in the United Kingdom, for instance, faced Con- industrial action (including

siderable opposition by employers, the police and the state. The Tolpuddle martyrs, _ strikes, sit-ins and pickets), and
whose attempts to form a trade union earned them transportation to Australia in eee ee
1835, became a symbol of this struggle. They and many others inspired the Chartist  ‘#! andpolitica life. see
movement’s aim for social and political progress, and were forerunners of the devel- industrial relations
opment of trade unionism across the world.

As industrialisation transformed Europe, United States and Australia, trade unions
organised in new industries, from coalmining to textiles. These unions and their
members were routinely opposed by employers, who ‘locked out’ or sacked striking
workers, and by governments and police, who introduced and enforced laws restrict-
ing union formation and action (for example, on the United States see Stromquist
1990: 542). Despite this, unions continued to grow as industrialisation spread, and
larger social and political goals emerged out of their struggles. Among the most
important of these were the struggle for the eight-hour day, limits on child labour and
the right to universal suffrage. Legal recognition of the right to join a union (recog-

nised in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the United Nations

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

labour movement

The social movement that
supports the rights of labour
and its political and social goals.
The main organisations of the
labour movement are unions.
See unions.

industrial relations

The rules (legal or conventional)
that govern interactions
between different actors in
work (that is, employers,
workers, the state, industrial
commission) that affect pay,
employment, safety, inequality
and decision making.

in 1948) and the right to bargain collectively (recognised in many national jurisdic-
tions) were among the most important achievements of the labour movement.

One of the most important acts that can be taken by a group of workers, usually
through a trade union, is to strike, which involves a coordinated withdrawal of work-
ers’ labour. Strikes, in effect, stop the production of goods and services as a way of
increasing workers’ bargaining power with employers, who cannot make profits dur-
ing stoppages. This threat raises the stakes in industrial disputation.

During the 20th century, labour movements continued to grow in size, coverage
and importance. Unions fought for limits to the working day, the regulation of wages
and conditions, and unemployment insurance across the industrial world, also
providing crucial resources for the mobilisation of voters for socialist and labour par-
ties, whose reformist goals helped extend the social welfare capacity of governments.
Within industries and nations, union organisations vary in ideology and strength,
and in their relationships with other social and political actors. Coalminers, dock-
workers and manufacturing workers established long and proud histories of leading
working-class struggles. Other unions have been more accepting of the managerial
prerogative of business to run industry, preferring to act as a ‘bargaining agent’ for
employees that does not challenge the status quo.

The idea of industrial relations

The institutional context within which workplace actors organise and act on their
interests is referred to as industrial relations. Industrial relations are usually set out
within a legal framework, which provides rule-based settlements to workplace issues,
such as wage levels, leave and other entitlements, training allowances and occupa-
tional health and safety. Some national industrial relations systems are highly central-
ised (or corporatist), which gives unions a voice in overall wage outcomes, industry
development and government policy (Bean 1991: 123-4). Austria and Sweden are
good examples of this style of arrangement. Other systems, such as the industrial rela-
tions model of the United States, depend on local bargaining between firms and indi-
vidual workers, with less union involvement and much wider variations in outcome.
Increasingly, Australia’s system has shifted from the former to the latter model.

Australia’s industrial relations framework developed unique centralised, federated
features as industrial commissions assumed an arbitrating role in determining wages
and conditions over the course of the 20th century. Australia’s constitution limits
direct legislative intervention in industrial relations, but the Commonwealth has over-
come this through federal and state industrial relations commissions (Cockburn &
Yerbury 1982: 53-5). Although the powers of the Australian Industrial Relations
Commission (AIRC) have been reduced over the past 20 years as governments
attempted to deregulate the labour market (MacDermott 1997: 53-69; see also Hall
2006: 295), both state and federal commissions continue to set awards (that establish
minimum wages and conditions) across occupations and industries.

In Australia, governments accept the right to strike. However, in order for it to be
recognised, strike action is expected to follow formal bureaucratic industrial-relations

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT @

procedures. In addition, over the years, Labor and Coalition governments have inter-
preted the legality of strike action differently and occasionally narrowed the definition
of the right to strike. In some other countries, laws are even more restrictive on strike
activity and on trade unions in general. There are many countries in which free trade
unions are illegal and unionists are gaoled, tortured or killed for organising other
workers (see International Trade Union Confederation: <www.ituc-csi.org>). It was
also a tradition in some authoritarian and totalitarian states, especially in South
America, Asia and former Soviet Bloc countries, for governments to control and
direct unions, with little genuine democratic activity permitted on the part of the
membership (Valenzuela 1992: 89-90).

Unions under new pressures

From the early stages of the 20th century until the 1960s, Australian union member-
ship rose, falling only during the Great Depression (see Figure 10.2). This growth
registered the presence of unions as powerful industrial and political agents with an
increasingly formal role in industrial relations law. After the 1980s, however, union
membership declined sharply. Although there was a fall in union membership over
this period in many other countries, Australian unions performed comparatively
poorly. Some unionists blamed declining membership on the labour movement’s
close relationship with the Hawke and Keating Labor governments (1983-1996).
During this time unions were represented by the peak labour body, the Australian
Council of Trade Unions, in the series of agreements with the government on wages
called the Accords. However, critics argued that unions gained political influence at
the expense of maintaining an independent voice in the workplace (Singleton 1990).

Other factors in the ‘union decline’ story are also important. Close analysis of
Australian union membership trends by Peetz (1998: 175-84) located three principal
reasons for the decline over the 1980s and 1990s. The first was economic reforms

(etet= 0%) Proportion of employees who were trade union members, 1914-2008

70

Percentage

T T T T T T T
1914 1925 1937 1949 1961 1972 1984 1996 2008

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2010a) Year Book Australia, 2009-10, Cat. No. 1301.0, Canberra, AGPS, Table 8.57.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 243) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

welfare state

The form of the modern state
that promotes social protection
through services and income
resources: to various social
groups who are affected by
unemployment, illness and
other social disadvantage or
risks; and to those who cannot
or are not expected to provide
for themselves in gainful
employment (children, elderly
people). Welfare services
include public hospitals, schools
and employment assistance.
Welfare benefits include
unemployment, sickness,
sole-parent payments and
various types of pension.

LO4 Analyse the
evolving role of women
in the labour process
and different forms
their struggles for
equality have assumed

associated with post-Fordism that increased the casual workforce (where unions are
weak) and reduced the public sector workforce (where unions are strong). The sec-
ond was a shift to adversarial industrial relations brought about by tougher corporate
tactics and legal reforms by conservative governments. The third reason was the
weakness of ‘shopfloor’ union representation, which meant that unions had few on-
the-ground resources with which to resist hostile change. In addition, many unions
have been challenged by governance problems, as the highly publicised Health
Services Union fraud case revealed in 2013. Between 1992 and 2011, union member-
ship declined from 43 per cent to 18 per cent (ABS 2011b). However, unions continue
to influence Australian politics: for instance, they launched a powerful campaign
against the Howard Coalition government’s restrictive WorkChoice laws (Meagher &
Wilson 2007); and their influence within the Australian Labor Party remains a subject
of internal party discussion.

Work and the welfare state

Conflicts over work, unemployment and social inequalities also put tremendous pres-
sure on governments to expand other forms of social protection. The welfare state,
in which the state guarantees some level of economic and social security for its citi-
zens in the areas of unemployment benefits, health, education and aged care, was a
major development of 20th-century politics. Although the origins of welfare can be
traced back to pre-industrial society, the rise of the market economy—in which the
impersonal forces of the law of supply and demand determine life chances and eco-
nomic resources—produced calls for social protection. Unions, political parties and,
particularly later, a wide range of social movements sought protection from the risks
of unemployment and poverty in old age. After a period of war and depression in the
mid-20th century, the public wanted to provide much greater economic and social
security (see Briggs 2000: 19).

After World War II, governments raised their commitment to policies aimed at
providing full employment (see Skocpol 1995; Esping-Andersen 1990; Castles 1985).
The state played a direct role in creating jobs or stimulated the economy to create
work. Today, liberal and conservative governments encourage ‘welfare to work’,
which aims to provide incentives to find work in the private economy and disincen-
tives to remain in receipt of social security payments. Although the Australian public
generally supports more obligations on welfare recipients (see Wilson et al. 2005),
there is some controversy about how far governments should go in cutting welfare
benefits to those who ‘breach’ their obligations to look for work (see Coad et al. 2006).
In these debates, different interpretations of the modern work ethic compete.

lM WORK, GENDER AND FAMILY

From the beginning of the 20th century, Australia practiced a unique system of indus-
trial relations, where industrial commissions enshrined the idea of a ‘living wage’
protecting the income levels of male breadwinners (Castles 1985). This was consistent
with changes associated with the industrial revolution, which promoted an increasing

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT @

separation of the ‘formal’ economy (with its emphasis on working for a wage) and the
household. Labour performed outside the formal workplace, in the private world of
the household, has always been vital to family and economic reproduction. However,
household work was devalued as the formal economy expanded.

With gender remaining one of the most important determinants of the division of
labour across all societies throughout history (Bourdieu 2001), women faced new
challenges as industrial society developed. Women’s lives became increasingly
defined by the household roles of reproduction, child-rearing and the maintenance of
the home. These roles and expectations restricted women’s participation in the for-
mal economy and limited opportunities for women to participate in the public sphere
(Pateman 2000: 137). Even when women worked in the industrial economy, their
wages and status were marginal and legally lower than men’s wages.

Although social expectations and industrial awards restricted women working,
women did participate in work outside the home. Women were a significant part
of industrialisation, working in textiles factories, in the tobacco industry, as clerical
workers, and in other manufacturing (Markey 1980: 83-111). Women also organ-
ised into unions, although initially male unionists resisted their entry to this mas-
culinist domain. In fact, the belief that women’s participation in the workforce is a
recent development is not supported by evidence. Just as single-parent families,
headed by women, have been around a long time, so have working women (see
Coontz 1988: 333).

Gender segregation and equal pay for women in Australia

The persistence of gendered views about work not only shapes the boundary between
the formal and household economies, but also shapes the distribution of work roles
within the workforce. Traditionally, women have been confined to jobs considered
‘women’s work’ (for example, nursing or sewing). Norms about women’s work are
still reflected in the fact that women tend to do jobs that are subordinate to men.
Workplace roles reinforce gender roles in the wider society.

Over the past 20 years, the difference between the earnings of full-time male work-
ers and full-time female workers has remained consistently in favour of men by
between 15 per cent and 17 per cent (see Figure 10.3). This is known as the gender
pay gap. When gender is a defining characteristic of who works in a particular job or
industry, sociologists call this gender segregation. Often, this segregation is reflected
in different pay levels for the jobs men and women typically do. Skills are not neces-
sarily objectively valued but, rather, are interpreted against norms about the ‘value’ of
work, and thus reflect gender bias. Although it is unlawful in Australia to pay men
and women differently for the same work, this is sometimes difficult to prove. Still,
both the AIRC and the state commissions have powers to ensure that men and
women are paid equally for work of equal value.

Figure 10.4 provides a gender breakdown of occupational groups in Australia. We
can see that men are twice as likely to be managers and administrators, but women
now dominate the professions (though mainly the less-well-paid ones). Women are

gender pay gap

The difference between the
earnings of all full-time female
employees and all full-time
male earnings, computed as a
percentage of the full-time
male wage.

gender segregation

In the work environment, the
separation of tasks, jobs or
industries according to
gender-based norms or
expectations about what men
and women should do has the
effect of concentrating men and
women in particular areas of
work.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

STS S83) Gender pay gap, Australia, May 1995 to May 2013

18
Wer May 2013
o 17.5%
t2))
2 iN
o 16-
° May 1995
é 16.5%
1544
Nov 2004
14.9%
145 T T T T T T T T
1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
At May

Source: Australian Government (2013) Gender Pay Gap Statistics, Figure 1, Workplace Gender Equality Agency,

Canberra, AGPS.

concentrated in lower-paying sectors of the economy, in less-skilled clerical, sales and
service work. Overall, men are still more likely to work in jobs that attract high
incomes, allow for greater autonomy and require a high level of skill, such as manage-

rial positions and the trades.

Gender segregation in the workplace can be addressed through legislation that pro-
vides for equal opportunity and affirmative action. ‘Affirmative action’ has different

LU Sa 0S) Employment distribution by industry, 2010/11

Agriculture, forestry and fishing

Mining

Manufacturing

Electricity, gas, water and waste services
Construction

Wholesale trade

Retail trade

Accommodation and food services
Transport, postal and warehousing
Information media and telecommunications
Financial and insurance services

Rental, hiring and real estate services
Professional, scientific and technical services
Administrative and support services

Public administration and safety

Education and training

Health care and social assistance

Arts and recreation services

Other services

@ Males, 20-74 years
© Females, 20-74 years

10

15 20

Percentage

25

Employment distribution by industry as a proportion of total employed for males and females. Industry classified according
to ABS Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification (ANZSIC) 2006 (cat. 1292.0). Data were calculated as an
average of four quarters (August, November, February, May) in the financial year.
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012) Gender Indicators Australia, January 2012, Cat. No. 4125.0, Canberra, AGPS.

© Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e



CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT @

meanings in different contexts and jurisdictions, but it generally involves providing
opportunities for the advancement of women where women are underrepresented
and/or face additional difficulties achieving equal status to men. The same principle
applies to other disadvantaged groups. A deep change in attitudes is required to over-
come sexism and gender biases at work and in the broader society. This change is
sometimes frustratingly slow (Summers 2013). There are no good reasons why women
cannot be managers or electricians, just as there are no good reasons why men cannot
be secretaries, textile workers or childcare workers.

A double burden? Women working in the workforce and
the household

Over the past three decades, women’s participation in the workforce has increased consid-
erably, although this has been and remains largely concentrated in part-time employment
(ABS 201 1a). Tertiary-educated women have succeeded in entering full-time employment
in larger numbers, but women without higher education have had fewer opportunities for
participating in full-time work. Women entering the workforce predominantly find jobs
in the service sector, which has many low-paying jobs as well as some high-paying ones.

Although women are participating in greater numbers in formal employment,
their responsibilities in the household remain somewhat similar to when women did
less paid work. Women are entering the workforce to meet their rising expectations
of paid employment and to provide additional income for themselves and their
families. But family responsibilities and household work do not automatically shrink
as the time women spend in paid work grows. In Australia, women’s time commit-
ments to household labour have fallen only slightly, and not enough to offset their
longer hours in the paid workforce (ABS 2009a). Australian sociologists Michael
Bittman and Jocelyn Pixley (1997: 114-15) have referred to this as the ‘double bur-
den’: women hold jobs as well as work at home.

One of the reasons for this double burden is that men are slow to change their
household commitments even when their female partners secure paid work. Women
(and families) can compensate by reducing time for household chores, ‘outsourcing’
responsibilities to the market (eating out, paying for child and aged care), or reorgan-
ising household responsibilities. Governments can also play a significant role in ena-
bling women to stay in the workforce by providing adequate child care and other
services (Lewis & Hobson 1997: 14). How to provide and fund child care is now a
source of ongoing controversy in Australia. Evidence, however, suggests that Australia
is falling behind similar countries in encouraging women into paid work (ABS 2004)
and that availability of affordable child care is a factor.

Discrimination at work

Our brief discussion of gender and work leads to further questions about why some
groups in the workforce achieve unequal outcomes in their jobs (for example, unequal
pay) and have disadvantaged access to factors that assist employment (such as

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

discrimination

To privilege, distinguish or deny
a group of people on the basis
of a set of characteristics (race,
social class, religion, gender,
sexuality). Discrimination in the
labour market is typically
experienced by groups
disadvantaged by social
stigma—that is, ethnic
minorities, women, gays and
lesbians, and people with
disabilities.

LOS Assess the future
of work and the
relevance of the work
ethic

unemployment

In Australia, the formal
definition of unemployment is:
persons aged 15 years and over
who are not employed but are
actively looking for full-time or
part-time work. See work and
underemployment.

underemployment
Individuals employed but
seeking more gainful employ-
ment than is available. In
Australia, the formal definition
of underemployment is: persons
who work fewer than 35 hours
in the week but who would
prefer to work more hours.

future of work
Speculation and projections
about the changing nature,
volume and meaning of work in
contemporary society.

educational opportunities). Where there are distinct patterns of inequality found among
social groups—for example, between men/women or Indigenous/non-Indigenous
Australians, or people born in Australia/overseas—sociologists are also interested in
the role that discrimination may play in this inequality.

When it comes to getting a job, sociological research goes some way to confirming
the saying, ‘It’s not what you know, but who you know.’ Similarly qualified people
usually apply for any given position or vacancy. Other sorting mechanisms such as
social networks in the workforce play a role in finding jobs. Mark Granovetter (1974)
found that extensive contacts made through networking or personal and business
associations are major sources of information and opportunity in getting jobs. The
‘ties’ between people in loose networks that operate in employment markets can carry
good information about candidates, but can also advantage ‘insiders’ unfairly.

Laws such as the federal Sex Discrimination Act 1984 and the Racial Discrimination Act
1975 prevent some forms of discrimination in the workplace. Larger firms and organisa-
tions will often adopt anti-discrimination and affirmative action policies either voluntarily
or to meet their legal obligations. However, legal reforms also depend on pressure from
social movements (for example, Aboriginal people, women, and gay men and lesbians)
organising together to challenge workplace discrimination both in policy and in networks.

lM UNEMPLOYMENT AND ITS SOLUTIONS: ARE WE FACING AN
‘END OF WORK’?

Because work is a vital social experience, unemployment and underemployment can
produce isolation, social exclusion and inequality. As we mentioned earlier in the chap-
ter, welfare states across the world tried to alleviate the burdens and poverty of jobless-
ness, committing to the goal of full employment in economic and social policy. But this
commitment has waned, or at least modified, almost everywhere as governments have
turned to market forces to generate economic growth. Over the past two decades there
has been an abiding pessimism about the future of work, with many commentators
believing that full employment in rich nations will no longer be possible, as vast improve-
ments in technology reduce the need for workers and the globalisation of the economy
shifts jobs to developing nations (for example, see Offe 1995; Rifkin 1995; Gorz 1999).

Until quite recently in Australia, the growth in service jobs had been insufficient
to offset the rise in unemployment since the end of the long boom in the 1970s. But
more recently, some of the pessimism about a ‘jobless future’ has been challenged by
a strong growth in employment. By June 2013, Australia’s unemployment rate was
6 per cent, which was low compared to the 1980s and 1990s. In Figure 10.5, which
provides a longer-term view on Australian unemployment since the 1980s, we can see
that unemployment peaked in the early 1990s (at around 11 per cent) but has since
fallen by almost half. While many Australians continue to suffer from the effects of
long-term unemployment, the economy now also suffers from serious skill shortages,
with firms having to work hard to attract workers, especially in specialised industries
or in outlying regions of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT @

ACU: Unemployment rate in Australia, 1979-2009

12

Percentage
(o>)

0 T T T T T T T T T
1979 1982 1985 1988 oon 1994 1997, 2000 2003 2006 2009

At December

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2010b) Australian Labour Market Statistics, March, Cat. No. 6105.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

While unemployment has fallen in some advanced economies, many sceptics
argue that jobs growth in countries like Australia and the United States has increased
the numbers of working poor—workers in full- or part-time jobs who remain impov- _ working poor
erished. This problem calls into question the quality of jobs created (Mishel et al. vranabletoateauatey but
1997: 20). Elisabeth Wynhausen’s (2005) book Dirt Cheap provides insight into the  supportthemselves or their
daily struggles to ‘get by’ in the low-paid Australian jobs market. ree om employment.
Other countries have made a stronger commitment to equality in seeking ways to
combat unemployment. Countries such as Sweden and Denmark have promoted
large public sector workforces (with stable jobs for women), reduced working hours
to stimulate jobs, and ensured a strong social safety net for low-income workers. The
Danish approach is called ‘flexi-security’ because it tries to marry ‘liberal’ employ-
ment markets with strong social protections (such as job retraining and unemploy-
ment protection). By contrast, the English-speaking economies that adopted a more
market-based approach have experienced higher levels of poverty, lower social spend-
ing and longer working hours. This has led researchers to emphasise that there are
‘varieties of capitalism’ (Marshall et al. 2008).
While unemployment remains a problem in most OECD (Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development) countries—especially for some groups of
migrants, young people and people without high-demand skills—other problems
associated with regulating working hours are emerging. In countries that have few
legal protections on the length of the working week, such as Australia and the United
States, many full-time workers experience longer working hours (see van Wanrooy &
Wilson 2006), while many others are unemployed or underemployed. This creates
a division between the ‘work rich’ and the ‘work poor’ (Borland et al. 2001).
Underemployment is more often experienced by men in part-time jobs, who report,
among other things, not having relevant skills (see ABS 2005).
Another labour market issue is security of tenure. Part-time workers, once a small
number of workers (usually women) who were employed for short hours, now

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

constitute a more important part of the workforce. Part-time workers increased from
16 per cent of the population in 1979 to 30 per cent by 2009, while another 20 per cent
in 2009 worked as casuals (ABS 2009b). When the underemployment associated with
part-time and casual work is combined with unemployment, it has been estimated
that—as of June 2013—13 per cent of the Australian workforce is underutilised,
which is more than double the official unemployment rate (ABS 2013).

Radicals have sought fundamental alternatives to a society that can no longer depend
on high employment levels. Joblessness and a shift towards ‘post-industrial’ cultural
values led writers like Claus Offe (1995: 77-81), Andre Gorz (1999) and Jeremy Rifkin
(1995) to question the primacy of work in people’s lives. These authors argue that, his-
torically, work remained at the centre of politics and social identity up to the Fordist era
when full employment was achievable and society was premised on class relations. But
in post-Fordist society, work cannot fulfil this role, in part because technological change
has made full employment much harder to sustain, and in part because class and occu-
pation are no longer as central in shaping personal identities (Sennett 1998).

Offe and Gorz propose a radical solution to joblessness—to guarantee a minimum
income without the expectation of working for it. This policy, they argue, would solve
some of the distributional side-effects of permanent unemployment while providing
individuals with the income required to sustain lives outside the labour market.
Additionally, individuals would have free time to pursue personal and community
goals, which would otherwise be made difficult by work commitments. This solution,
however, fundamentally transfigures the modern work ethic.

Can we envisage such a policy turn in Australian society taking place? Those who
predict a technologically induced “end of work’ tend to ignore evidence that employment
is both destroyed and generated by technological and economic change, creating both
new employment for the ‘winners’ and unemploymentand unsatisfying work experiences
for the ‘losers’. There are other causes of high unemployment, which include cutbacks
to government services, and the level of demand nationally and globally. Although
unemployment remains a major problem, measures of the proportion of people
employed in the working-aged population (the employment-to-population ratio) have
continued to rise in many industrialised countries, in part because of the continued
entry of women into the workforce (International Labour Organization 2002).

Writers like Offe, Gorz and Rifkin also assume that the commitment to work (or
work ethic) has somehow diminished. But this can also be questioned. Throughout
history, workers have felt ambivalent about their work: it can be a source of identity,
reward, struggle or boredom, depending on the circumstances. Alienation at work is
particularly understandable for those who work in tedious, repetitive and unstimulat-
ing jobs or face low pay, discrimination and harassment on a daily basis. But generally
people have high expectations of finding fulfilling employment, which is important
for esteem and identity (Appelbaum 1998: 215-20; Lipset 1992: 45-54). Many stu-
dents attend university in the expectation that this additional educational effort will
result in more rewarding employment opportunities. Sociological and psychological
studies of workers who have been regularly unemployed or have boring and routine

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT @®

jobs show that their self-esteem and personal power can be damaged (see Mirowsky &
Ross 1989: 133-4; Rothman 1987: 206-12). It is therefore likely that work will remain
central to the way our society is shaped, to the form that conflicts take and to the for-
mation of our social identities.

A strong public expectation that able-bodied adults should work also helps explain
the current ‘welfare to work’ policies of advanced societies. According to the Australian
Survey of Social Attitudes, over 70 per cent of Australians believe that welfare recipients
should be under more obligation to work (Wilson et al. 2005). “Welfare to work’ policies
are underpinned by the work ethic that positions work as central to social order and
individual integration into society. Conservatives who support ‘welfare to work’ initia-
tives maintain that the modern welfare state has expanded entitlements to the poor and
unemployed without expecting that individuals make a contribution to society in return
(Mead 1997). New welfare initiatives in Australia, the United Kingdom and the United
States have promoted the idea of ‘mutual obligation’, which imposes expectations and
activity tests on social security recipients (particularly the jobless) in return for public
support. “Work for the dole’, introduced by the Howard government in 1997 (and
expanded by subsequent governments), was an example of mutual obligation in policy.

Yet ‘welfare to work’ policies depend on the availability of employment in the
labour market, and assume that all welfare recipients expected to work are in a rea-
sonable position to do so. Expensive or inadequate childcare options in countries like
Australia and the United States make it hard for single women with children to find
work, especially if those jobs are low-paid. Pushing people off welfare into the labour
market (without sustained job creation that provides for living wages and adequate
social support) carries the risk of merely adding to the numbers of working poor.

CONCLUSION

This chapter has established that work is a central domain of industrial society and that changes in our
experience of work have profound social implications. The working environment is a social environment in
which culture, power, gender and class are both formed and refracted. Despite technological and managerial
change, and wide variations in the tasks people perform, work remains an intrinsically social experience.

It is unlikely that the ‘end of work’ is nigh in any literal sense, or even in the sense that pessimistic social
commentators have projected. However, problems of unemployment and underemployment will remain a
significant cause of poverty for citizens in advanced societies. A major problem facing some governments and
societies is the growth of the working poor. If employment growth and mutual obligation programs do not
meet the income, health, education and welfare needs of low-wage workers, then the jobless problem of the
previous decades is merely shifted rather than resolved. These problems are even more serious in parts of the
world that are less economically developed, which have not been surveyed here.

The alternatives for work remain stark. Societies can opt to share work and education more equitably, to create
sustainable, meaningful employment and protect the rights of the working population. Or societies can allow work
to remain a defining element of social inequality. This inequality is reflected in the divide between winners and
losers, the time-rich and the time-poor, men and women and the overemployed, underemployed and unemployed.

° Overcoming these divisions will require fundamental transformations in the social relations associated with work.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Gan AL get be Ls

oe

Kd

10.

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

Why was work a pivotal concept for many classical sociologists? (LO1)

How important is work to you? To what extent is your personal identity, or those close to you,
shaped by work experiences? (LO1)

What were the key characteristics of the Fordist method of work organisation? (LO2)

Is work becoming increasingly de-skilled as capitalist technology evolves? (LO2)

Are unions necessary for today’s workforce? (LO3)

How do you think discrimination at work can be overcome? Is discrimination solved by policies
such as affirmative action and equal opportunity? (LO4)

Should people who perform household duties be paid a wage like other workers or be
encouraged to join the workforce? (LO4)

Are unemployed people responsible for their unemployment, or is unemployment the result
of too few jobs? (LO5)

Does the pressure to complete tasks on time within standard formats for performing work
in a call centre today differ so much from the pressure on workers on a factory production
line? (LO5)

Do you think we should place less importance on work? Is the work ethic outdated? (LO1
and LOS5)

Aglietta, M. (1979) A Theory of Capitalist Regulation: The US Experience, trans. D. Fernbach, London, New Left

Books.

Appelbaum, H. (1998) The American Work Ethic and the Changing Workforce, Westport, CN, Greenwood.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2004) ‘Feature Article—Labour Force Participation’, Australian Labour

Market Statistics, January, Cat. No. 6105.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2005) Australian Labour Market Statistics, January, Cat. No. 6105.0,

Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009a) Trends in Household Work: Australian Social Trends, March, Cat. No.

4102.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009b) Patterns in Work: Australian Social Trends, December, Cat. No.

4102.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2010a) Year Book Australia, 2009-10, Cat. No. 1301.0, Canberra, AGPS.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2010b) Australian Labour Market Statistics, March, Cat. No. 6105.0,

Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (201 1a) Australian Social Trends, December, Cat. No. 4102.0, Canberra, AGPS.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2011b) Employee Earnings, Benefits and Trade Union Membership, Australia,

August, Cat. No. 6310.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012) Gender Indicators Australia, January, Cat. No. 4125.0, Canberra, AGPS.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2013) Labour Force Australia, June, Cat. No. 6202.0, Canberra, AGPS.
Australian Government (2013) Gender Pay Gap Statistics, Workplace Gender Equality Agency, Canberra, AGPS.

Bean, R. (1991) Comparative Industrial Relations: An Introduction to Cross-National Perspectives, Sydney,

Crook Helm.

Bittman, M. & Pixley, J. (1997) The Double Life of the Family, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING EN

Boissonnade, P. (1937) Life and Work in Medieval Europe: Fifth to Fifteenth Centuries, trans. and intro. E. Power,
London, Kegal Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.

Borland, J., Gregory, B. & Sheehan, P.J. (eds) (2001) Work Rich, Work Poor, Melbourne, Centre for Strategic
Economic Studies.

Bourdieu, P. (2001) Masculine Domination, trans. R. Nice, Stanford, CA, Stanford University Press.

Boyer, R. & Morais, H. (1972) Labor's Untold Story, New York, United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers
of America.

Braverman, H. (1974) Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century, New York,
Monthly Review Press.

Brenner, R. (1998) ‘The Economics of Global Turbulence (Special Issue)’, New Left Review, 229, May/June,
pp. 1-265.

Briggs, A. (2000) ‘The Welfare State in Historical Perspective’, in C. Pierson & F. Castles (eds), The Welfare State
Reader, Cambridge, Polity, pp. 18-31.

Castles, F. (1985) The Working Class and Welfare: Reflections on the Political Development of the Welfare State in
Australia and New Zealand, 1890-1980, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Coad, M., Finlay, J., Raper, M. & Thomas, G. (2006) Welfare to Work or Unworkable Welfare?, Sydney, National
Association of Community Legal Centres.

Cockburn, M. & Yerbury, D. (1982) ‘The Federal/State Framework of Australian Industrial Relations’, in K. Cole
(ed.), Power, Conflict and Control in Australian Trade Unions, Melbourne, Penguin, pp. 52-84.

Coontz, S. (1988) The Social Origins of Private Life: A History of American Families 1600-1900, New York, Verso.

Cross, G. (1993) Time and Money: The Making of Consumer Culture, London, Routledge.

Durkheim, E. (1964) The Division of Labour in Society, trans. G. Simpson, New York, Free Press.

Ehrenreich, B. (2001) Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America, New York, Metropolitan Books.

Ehrenreich, B. (2006) Bait and Switch: The Futile Pursuit of the Corporate Dream, London, Granta Books.

Engels, F. (1976) The Condition of the Working Class in England, London, Panther.

Esping-Andersen, G. (1990) Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism, Cambridge, Polity.

Gillespie, R. (1993) Manufacturing Knowledge: A History of the Hawthorne Experiments, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Gorz, A. (1999) Reclaiming Work: Beyond the Wage-Based Society, Cambridge, Polity.

Granovetter, M. (1974) Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

Grusky, D.B. (ed.) (1994) Social Stratification: Class, Race, and Gender in Sociological Perspective, Boulder, CO,
Westview Press.

Hall, R. (2006) ‘Australian Industrial Relations 2005—The Work Choices Revolution’, Journal of Industrial
Relations, 48(3), pp. 291-303.

Hardt, M. & Negri, A. (2000) Empire, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

Henriques, U. (1979) Before the Welfare State: Social Administration in Early Industrial Britain, London, Longman.

Hobsbawm, E. (1962) The Age of Revolution, Europe 1789-1848, London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

Hochschild, A. (1983) The Managed Heart: The Commercialization of Human Feeling, Berkeley, CA, University of
California Press.

International Labour Organization (2002) ‘KILM 2: Employment-to-Population Ratio’, <http://kilm.ilo.org/

manuscript/kilm02.asp>.

Lamb, R. (1975) ‘Adam Smith’s Concept of Alienation’, Oxford Economic Papers, 25(2), pp. 275-85.

Lewis, J. & Hobson, B. (1997) ‘Introduction’, in J. Lewis (ed.), Lone Mothers in European Welfare Regimes: Shifting
Policy Logics, London, Jessica Kingsley Publishers, pp. 1-20.

Lipietz, A. (1987) Mirages and Miracles: The Crisis in Global Fordism, trans. D. Macey, London, Verso.

Lipset, S.M. (1992) ‘The Work Ethic, Then and Now’, Journal of Labor Research, 13(1), Winter, pp. 45-54.

MacDermott, T. (1997) ‘Industrial Legislation in 1996: The Reform Agenda’, Journal of industrial Relations, 39(1),
pp. 52-76.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Markey, R. (1980) ‘Women and Labour, 1880-1900’, in E. Windshuttle (ed.), Women, Class and History: Feminist
Perspectives on Australia, 1788-1978, Melbourne, Fontana/Collins, pp. 83-111.

Markey, R. (1990) ‘Australia’, in M. Van Der Linden & J. Rojahn (eds), The Formation of Labour Movements
1870-1914: An International Perspective, Leiden, E.J. Brill, pp. 579-608.

Marshall, S., Mitchell, R. & Ransey, |. (eds) (2008) Varieties of Capitalism, Corporate Governance and Employees,
Melbourne, Melbourne University Press.

Marx, K. (1974) ‘On Alienation’, in W.E. Connolly & G. Gordon (eds), Social Structure and Political Theory,
Lexington, MA, D.C. Heath, pp. 97-109.

Mead, L. (ed.) (1997) The New Paternalism: Supervisory Approaches to Poverty, Washington, DC, Brookings
Institution Press.

Meagher, G. & Wilson, S. (2007) ‘Are Unions Regaining Popular Legitimacy in Australia?’, in D. Denemark,
G. Meagher, S. Wilson, M. Western & T. Phillips (eds), Australian Social Attitudes II: Citizenship, Work and
Aspirations in Howard's Australia, Sydney, University of New South Wales Press.

Mirowsky, J. & Ross, C. (1989) Social Causes of Psychological Distress, New York, Aldine de Gruyter.

Mishel, L., Bernstein, J. & Schmitt, J. (1997) The State of Working America, 1996-97, London, M.E. Sharpe.

Montgomery, D. (1979) Workers’ Control in America: Studies in the History of Work, Technology, and Labor
Struggles, New York, Cambridge University Press.

Moody, K. (1997) Workers in a Lean World: Unions in the International Economy, New York, Verso.

Offe, C. (1985) Disorganized Capitalism, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Offe, C. (1995) ‘Full Employment: Asking the Wrong Question?’, Dissent, Winter, pp. 77-81.

Pateman, C. (2000) ‘The Patriarchal Welfare State’, in C. Pierson & F. Castles (eds), The Welfare State Reader,
Cambridge, Polity, pp. 133-50.

Peetz, D. (1998) Unions in a Contrary World: The Future of the Australian Trade Union Movement, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Piore, M. & Sabel, C. (1984) The Second Industrial Divide: Possibilities for Prosperity, New York, Basic Books.

Polanyi, K. (1957) The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time, Boston, Beacon.

Rifkin, J. (1995) The End of Work: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post Market Era, New
York, G.P. Putman’s Sons.

Rothman, R. (1987) Working: Sociological Perspectives, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.

Sayers, S. (1988) ‘The Need to Work: A Perspective from Philosophy’, in R.E. Pahl (ed.), On Work: Historical,
Comparative and Theoretical Approaches, Oxford, Basil Blackwell, pp. 722-41.

Sennett, R. (1998) The Corrosion of Character, New York, W.W. Norton & Co.

Singleton, G. (1990) The Accord and the Australian Labour Movement, Melbourne, Melbourne Universiy Press.

Skocpol, T. (1995) Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins of Social Policy in the United States,
Boston, Belknap Press.

Smith, A. ([1776] 1976) An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Oxford, Clarendon Press.

Stromquist, S. (1990) ‘United States of America’, in M. Van Der Linden & J. Rojahn (eds), The Formation of Labour
Movements 1870-1914: An International Perspective, Leiden, E.J. Brill, pp. 543-77.

Summers, A. (2013) The Misogyny Factor, Sydney, New South Books.

Taylor, F. (1911) The Principles of Scientific Management, New York, Harper.

Tilgher, A. (1977) Work: What it Has Meant to Men through the Ages, trans. Dorothy Canfield Fisher, New York,
Arno Press.

Tilly, C. & Tilly, C. (1998) Work under Capitalism, Boulder, CO, Westview Press.

Valenzuela, J.S. (1992) ‘Labour Movements and Political Systems: Some Variations’, in M. Regini (ed.), The
Future of Labour Movements, London, Sage, pp. 53-101.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING EN

Van Wanrooy, B. & Wilson, S. (2006) ‘Convincing the Toilers: On the Dilemmas of Long Working Hours in
Australia’, Work, Employment and Society, 20(2), pp. 349-68.

Weber, M. (1995) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, trans. Talcott Parsons, intro. A. Giddens,
London, Routledge.

West, E.G. (1975) ‘Adam Smith and Alienation: A Rejoinder’, Oxford Economic Papers, 27(2), pp. 295-301.

Wilson, S., Meagher, G. & Breusch, T. (2005) ‘Where to for the Welfare State?’, in S. Wilson, G. Meagher &
R. Gibson (eds), Australian Social Attitudes: The First Report, Sydney, University of New South Wales Press,
pp. 1522-7.

Wright, E.O. (1997) Class Counts: Comparative Studies in Class Analysis, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Wynhausen, E. (2005) Dirt Cheap: Life at the Wrong End of the Job Market, Sydney, Macmillan.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11

POWER AND THE STATE

— This chapter introduces theories on the nature of power and the state.
It begins with a discussion of the origins of the modern liberal-democratic state
types of liberalism—classical liberalism, social liberalism and neo-liberalism—are
described, and their influence on the Australian state is explored.
™® The Marxist critique of liberalism is then outlined, and Australian Marxist analyse:
state are discussed.
™ The Weberian and elite perspectives on the state are explored alongside Austral
applications that qualify the democratic nature of the modern state.
The work of Michel Foucault is then introduced, shifting the analysis of power away fr
the state towards a more diffuse conceptualisation of power as constituted through
discursive webs.
HH Finally, these theories of power are applied to assess the future of the modern na’
in the era of globalisation.

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Describe the origins and lasting signit
of liberalism, along with its different f

LO2 Juxtapose liberal and Marxist approach
power and the state

LO3 Analyse Weberian and elitist approac!
to power

LO4 Explain why Foucault's approach to pov
challenged previous state-centred anal

LOS Apply liberal, Marxist and Foucauldiat
approaches to the process of global
and the future of the nation-state



CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 257 )

Every year, the Australian Financial Review Magazine assembles a ‘power panel’ of
prominent Australians. Its task is to compile ‘power lists’ of ‘Australia’s top power
brokers’. In 2013, the lists consisted of executives of large businesses, former federal
cabinet members and other social and cultural leaders from university, Indigenous
and artistic sectors (see Table 11.1). The constitution of the ‘overt power’ list is domi-
nated by politicians and business leaders. The ‘covert power’ list is more diffuse and
senior public servants, ministerial advisors, political campaign organisers, Indigenous
leaders, lobby groups, pollsters and think tanks vie with current and past politicians.
The ‘cultural power’ list also contains current and past politicians, along with sport-
ing and artistic identities as well as a philanthropist. In these three key power lists,
men significantly outnumber women and Australia’s richest person, Gina Rinehart,
fails to appear.
These lists raise a number of interesting issues for sociologists. From where does
power originate? Is power wielded by individuals, or do individuals merely repre-
sent powerful social institutions? Does the AFR Magazine ‘power list’ accurately
reflect the distribution of power in Australia? Does the concept of ‘power’ sit
uncomfortably with the ideals of Australia’s liberal democracy, where all are equal _ liberal democracy
before the law? Is power centred in government and the state, or is it diffused orunveralepesentaton
throughout society? combined with an economic
This chapter begins by looking at the origins of the modern state before assessing mina afte mate,
why liberalism has held such sway over modern understandings of power. It then
moves on to examine two sociological interrogations of liberal power, the Marxist and
Weberian approaches. In each section, these claims are assessed using Australian
research. The final two sections of the chapter describe significant contemporary
challenges to the way sociologists have understood power and the state. First, the
work of Michel Foucault is introduced, describing how it conceptualises power as
more diffuse than previous state-centred approaches. Second, we look at the chal-
lenges that globalisation poses for the future of the nation-state.

AFR Magazine's 2013 power broker lists

OVERT POWER COVERT POWER CULTURAL POWER

Tony Abbott lan Watt Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu

Glenn Stevens

Joe Hockey

Rupert Murdoch
Julia Gillard

Kevin Rudd

Big Four bank CEOs
Barry O'Farrell

Jennifer Westacott/Tony Shepherd

Andrew Mackenzie/Jac Nasser

Peta Credlin

Noel Pearson

Pollsters

Mark Textor/Brian Loughnane
Christopher Pyne

Grattan Institute

David Gonski

Heather Ridout

John Howard

David Walsh

Andrew Demetriou

Massive open online courses
Penny Wong

Graham Tuckwell

Julia Gillard/Anne Summers
Adam Goodes

Wayne Blair

Ben Quilty

TABLE 11.1

Source: Cornell, A. (2013) ‘Australia’s Top Power Brokers Revealed’, Australian Financial Review Magazine,
25 October. © Fairfax Media Publications Pty Limited.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 257) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO1 Describe the
origins and lasting
significance of
liberalism, along with
its different forms

citizenship

Aset of duties and
fesponsibilities attached to
belonging to a particular
nation-state, from voting
entitlements to access to
consular services.

sovereignty

Defined by Held & McGrew
(2002: 10) as a ‘special claim
to the rightful exercise of
political power over a
circumscribed realm’.

i THE DEMOCRATIC BASIS OF MODERN POWER

States are governing bodies with the claim to authority for law making and law
enforcement over a particular territory. This concept of the state needs to be distin-
guished from two closely related concepts: a country and a nation. A ‘country’ is a

while a ‘nation’ is

Modern states are often labelled ‘nation-states’, combining the characteristics of
nationhood and statehood. Over the past 200 years a significant focus of the
international-relations system has involved nationalist struggles by peoples to create
independent nation-states. In the Australian case, the British state colonised a land of
many Indigenous nations, and in 1901 the six British colonies united as a federal
nation-state.

The nation-state is one of the most abstract communities to which most people
belong. Many social entities—such as the family, the neighbourhood and the
workplace—are on a scale where people personally recognise others. The sense of
belonging to the nation-state involves a community where members are personally
acquainted with only a tiny proportion of those who constitute it. This is why Anderson
(1991) calls the nation an ‘imagined community’. Various governmental efforts are
required to reinforce this imagined community. The education system inculcates a geo-
graphic sense of community that bounds the nation-state, while the disciplines of history
and literature reinforce shared martial and literary traditions. During the 19th century, as
modern industrial change loosened more traditional, communal ties (see Chapter 16),
the ‘invention’ of a shared national past gave people a new sense of communal bonding
(Hobsbawm & Ranger 1992). Nation-states also consolidated themselves by enhancing
their statistical ability to control and monitor the populations within their realm.

In the contemporary world, voting in elections also performs a shared, ritualised
role of communal action where citizens ‘shape’ the future of the nation. Through a
combination of these practices, the nation-state comes to resemble a timeless,
taken-for-granted and natural phenomenon.

The ascent of liberalism

Attempts have also been made to find a philosophical justification for this sense of
citizenship and belonging. As the foundations of absolute monarchy were being
shaken with the advent of modernity in the 17th century, political philosophers began
to question the source from which rulers derived their authority. As secularisation
advanced, traditional ‘God-given’ claims to state legitimacy lost their appeal.
Philosophers such as Thomas Hobbes and John Locke argued in different ways that
rulers historically derived their right to rule from a social contract to establish peace
and security. Originally, individuals were sovereign, and these individuals ceded this

sovereignty to a collectivity known as the ‘state’ in exchange for protection from pos-
. One consequence of this theory was

that if those who embodied this collective sovereignty failed to uphold their part of this

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 257 )

contract, then those they ruled were entitled to rid themselves of their rulers. The sov-
ereign ultimately derived their authority from the consent of those over whom they
ruled. By ceding their natural rights, individuals gained civil rights. This had revolu-
tionary consequences: the “divine right of kings’ was challenged by the ‘rights of man’.

This challenge to absolutism led to a long march of democratisation from the English
Civil War of the 17th century to contemporary struggles for political rights throughout
the world. The political ideals of liberalism have performed an important role in cham-
pioning the claim that each individual has an equal right to political representation and
the right to freedom of thought. Fukuyama (1992) has argued that modern history can
be interpreted as a struggle between liberalism and its absolutist opponents, and then
fascism and communism. This struggle culminated at the end of the Cold War in the

1990s with the ultimate victory of liberalism. In this liberal, or pluralist, view, the state
represents the universal interests of society and laws should reflect the ‘general will, as

the 1789 Declaration of the Assembly proclaimed during the French Revolution.
Liberalism is both explanatory and advocatory. Classical liberalism signified an
attack on arbitrary power and an advance in individual self-expression, liberatory

human organisation and human dignity. Its focus was
cy and penalised the risin
capitis cass. Tt sought to free people and the market from the shackles of despotic

However, by the end of the 19th century, liberalism began to devote more atten-
tion to issues of political representation. More significantly, workers’ struggles
turned many liberals, including the sociologist L.T. Hobho rds ‘social issues’
such as poverty and welfare, arguing that ‘freedom’ mt.

- degree of access and equality. This strand of liberalism came to be known as ‘social
liberalism’. Those who continued to demand the withdrawal of the state from eco-_

Social liberalism reinterpreted progress as the extension of citizenship rights. T.H.
Marshall (1977) divided this history of citizenship into three stages. During the earli-
est stage, the struggle for citizenship focused on ‘civil rights’ and the demand for
equality before the law. This was followed by the struggle for ‘political rights’—in
particular, the struggle to extend suffrage, beginning with widening property owner-
ship requirements and culminating in universal suffrage, including women’s right to
vote. Social liberalism sought to extend state support for those whose economic cir-
cumstances denied them access to social resources such as education, health care and
an adequate retirement income. This struggle for ‘social rights’ culminated in the
development of the welfare state (see Chapter 10).

Social liberalism and the Australian way

The history of the Australian welfare state over the 20th century has been interpreted
as a progressive attempt to extend social liberalism to social groups previously
excluded from citizenship rights and adequate services (Sawer 2003; Greig et al. 2003).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 257) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Social liberalism views history as the struggle to reform the law, to extend liberty and

At the beginning of the 20th century, Australia was considered by many interna-
tional commentators to be an exemplar in state-sponsored welfare provision and
arbitration of social conflict (Kelly 1992). Aged pensions, free and compulsory educa-
tion, and women’s suffrage were all introduced early on in the history of the
Commonwealth. Furthermore, the state intervened in industrial relations to ensure
that employers remunerated their workers fairly through dictating minimum wages
according to occupation (see Chapter 10).

However, the advantages of this experiment in social liberalism were restricted to
certain groups of people, mainly Anglo-Celtic males, and throughout the 20th cen-
tury political struggles were mounted by various groups to extend citizenship rights
to marginalised social groups.

The most discriminatory aspect of Australian social liberalism was the reference
in the Constitution that denied citizenship rights to Indigenous Australians (see
Chapter 3). They were placed under the jurisdiction of state governments, were
subject to severe restrictions on their movements, and were denied coverage by fair
wage legislation and access to welfare enjoyed by other Australians. In some areas,
they were restricted to reserves and missions where paternalistic control was exer-
cised over all aspects of their lives, including matrimony and child-rearing.
Campaigns for civil rights culminated in 1967 with a referendum that removed the
discriminatory clauses in the Constitution. In the 1970s, the official state policy of
assimilating Indigenous Australians was rejected in favour of a policy of self-
determination, and greater autonomy over Indigenous affairs was decreed. However,
this exercise in self-determination stalled in the late 1990s and debates continue
over whether the Indigenous service provision should be controlled by Indigenous
organisations or ‘mainstream’ institutions.

Non-English-speaking migrants were also faced with discriminatory legislation
(see Chapter 5). The 1901 Immigration Restriction Act effectively barred non-white
persons (including South Sea Islanders) from permanent residency and citizenship.
This “White Australia’ policy narrowed the demographic profile of the nation to
such an extent that by World War II, 95 per cent of the non-Indigenous Australian
population had British heritage. Until 1948, Australians remained ‘British subjects’,
rather than ‘Australian citizens’. In the wake of the war, a mass state-sponsored
immigration program widened the ethnic demographic profile. Although employ-
ment was readily available, these non-English-speaking migrants found it difficult
to access housing and welfare provision and had to wait longer than English-
speaking migrants to obtain citizenship. The policy of ‘assimilation’ expected
migrants to integrate into the dominant white Anglo-Celtic way of life without pro-
viding them with adequate assistance to do so. Gradually, migrant assistance serv-
ices and translation services were provided by the state as it became evident that
many non-English-speaking migrants were disadvantaged. Further progress was
made in the 1960s and 1970s through the replacement of the White Australia policy

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 257)

with i art of the citizenship rights of migrants now
included the right to practise—and to receive resources in order to be able to
practise—their culture of origin within the bounds of Australian law. The state
provision of migrant services was consistent with the social liberal philosophy that
disadvantaged people should receive assistance.
Women were another social group whose citizenship rights were restricted at the
time of Federation, and their struggles throughout the 20th century represented
another indication of social liberal reform. Although women were enfranchised in
1902, the rights accorded to women tended to emphasise their ‘domestic’ role in soci-
ety at the expense of their public role. For instance, a fair wage was defined as a ‘fam-
ily wage’, sufficient for a worker to meet the needs of a wife and children, and women
were denied equal pay (see Chapter 10).
Another gendered discriminatory feature in Australian workplaces was the prac-
tice in some occupational sectors (such as the public service and banking) of denying
women full-time status after marriage, again reinforcing their domestic role rather
than their public one. Campaigns by feminists helped to dismantle some of these
inequities. Equal pay legislation was introduced in 1969, followed by 1972 legislation
decreeing ‘equal pay for work of equal value’. Sexual discrimination also impaired
women’s rights, and during the 1980s equal opportunity and anti-discrimination
legislation was introduced. However, despite these social liberal efforts to achieve
equality in the eyes of the law, little change has occurred since the 1980s in terms of
reducing the gap between men’s and women’s wages (see Chapter 10).
Thus, the political history of Australia during the 20th century can be interpreted as
the progressive extension of citizenship rights, as outlined by T.H. Marshall, to embrace
sectors of society that previously experienced discrimination. From a social liberal per-
spective, this reform of the state contributed to Australia’s relatively high standard of
living and its egalitarian ethos (see Chapter 2). However, since the 1980s the interven-
tionist social liberal state has been challenged by greater neo-liberal emphasis on
market forces. Kelly (1992) considered this unravelling of the Australian settlement to Australian settlement
be inevitable, while Sawer (2003) lamented the demise of the ‘ethical’ social liberal state. scion catiencnrta
The liberal ideal has remained so hegemonic throughout modern Western society describe the unique political
that it is difficult for most citizens to consider a better way of exercising state power. Most Snustataieln
debates over liberal democracy involve its most appropriate form: for example, is liberal _ the 1970s, which incuded
democracy enhanced through a proportional voting system or a first-past-the-post asrminaoy mugen
system? What are the advantages and disadvantages of a presidential system over the _ Policy, wage arbitration,
. state intervention and reliance
Westminster system? on strong imperial powers
However, there have always been social philosophers who have questioned whether defence.
the reality of liberal rule corresponds with its ideals. Some have questioned the
likelihood of an original ‘social contract’. The Scottish enlightenment philosopher
David Hume considered it fanciful that states emerged through some form of social

consensus.

(Hume 1987).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 257) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO2 Juxtapose
liberal and Marxist
approaches to power
and the state

formal equality

The French writer Anatole
France summed up the
ideological nature of formal
equality as follows: ‘The law, in
its majestic equality, forbids the
ich as well as the poor to sleep
under bridges, to beg in the
streets, and to steal bread.’

i THE CLASS BASIS OF MODERN POWER

The Marxist challenge to liberalism

The association of the state with coercive power was adopted by Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels, who developed one of the most influential critiques of liberalism. The
notion that consensus and cooperation lay at the foundation of the legitimacy of the
modern state sat uncomfortably with Marx and Engels’ outline of history. They argued
that the key to understanding the fundamental dynamics of historical development was
ith different relationships to
(see Chapter 2). From antiquity through to feudalism and into
the present capitalist epoch, the class that owned and controlled the means of produc-
tion used the power of the state to advantageously order social relations.

This class that owned the means of production was identified as the ‘ruling class’.
In The Manifesto of the Communist Party, published in 1848 as subordinate classes
throughout Europe were challenging state power, Marx and Engels defined the state
in capitalist societies as principally ‘an executive committee’ for managing the affairs
of the ruling capitalist class. The laws passed by the modern legislature reflected the
interests of this capitalist class, and the forces of law and order were employed to
enforce capitalist order. Liberalism was considered the ideological expression of the
interests of

There are three crucial differences between liberalism and Marxism with respect
to state power. First, while liberals assume that the modern state is a representation
of the universal interest of society, where the different interests compete, compro-
mise and coalesce, Marxists argue that it reflects the particular needs of a specific
group, the capitalist class. Second, if the state reflects the particular interests of the
ruling class, rather than the general interest of society as a whole, then the state itself
is not the repository of power. It is merely a reflection of real power wielded by those
who own the means of production and use the state to reproduce the social inequal-
ities that maintain capitalist rule.

Third, Marxists refute the liberal notion that individual liberty is the precondition

for equality and social harmony. This abstract conception of freedom ignores the dif-
“ferential access to material and cultural resources among individuals and classes This

influences whether individuals can achieve their desired ends. The material and cul-
tural resources

. For Marxists, classical liberal-
ism obfuscates the nature of reality. Its ideals are based on a formal equality between
individual
possessed. Subsequently, social liberals came to acknowledge this problem of the
emptiness of formal equality and emphasised the role of the state in building the
capacity of individuals to take advantage of freedoms.

As liberal democracies developed after the 19th century, Marxists also had to
explain social trends inconsistent with their prediction that capitalist development

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 257)

would promote the Sollective consciousness Of the working class, who would over-

throw the exploitative capitalist state and replace it with one representing the interests
of the producing majority. Eventually, Marx and Engels argued, once class society had
been abolished through the equal participation of free workers, there would be no
need for a ‘state’ as such. Under communism, the state would ‘wither away’.
In order to explain why the working class has failed to overthrow the capitalist state
and transcend capitalist relations, 20th-century Marxism looked more closely at the
role performed by the state in reproducing existing social relations. The inter-war
Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci (1980) summed up this reconsideration of the nature
of the modern capitalist state in the equation:
Hegemony refers to the ways in which a ruling class deflects threats to its order hegemony
through ensuring that the ruling ideas of an epoch are those of the ruling class. Indeed, [acres oman
this view echoed that of the British social-liberal sociologist L.T. Hobhouse ([1911] _ allowing ciass rule to appear
1977: 10), who observed in 1911 that ‘the powers that be extend their sway not merely "*""
”, Gramsci placed less emphasis on the coer-
cive arm of the state apparatus (the military, the police and institutions of punishment)
and more on how the state inculcates the naturalness of capitalist relations.
The French Marxist Louis Althusser (1971) elaborated this concept of hegemony
through the concept of ideological state apparatuses (ISAs). These ISAs include the ideological state
the means of religious instruction (PP
The ideational functions that
and the means of entertainment. For Althusser, these ISAs manufacture consent to thestate oversees in orderto
class rule and are therefore implicated in the exploitation of workers by the ruling class. Ticmsocey mth
Other Marxists associated with the Frankfurt School also explored how modern
practices of ion and ‘normalise’
capitalism as the best of all possible worlds (Bottomore 1984). For example, advertising
functions to
Capitalist power manipulates, cramps or corrodes the minds of workers as consumers,
in order to deflect attention away from the inequitable power relationships that consti-
tute capitalist society. Capitalism offers
Furthermore, through regulating minimum wages and other social benefits for
workers, the capitalist state also alleviated the tendency of the capitalist system to
swing from booms to slumps by stabilising demand. So, the welfare state, hailed by
social liberals as a means of increasing the capacity of all citizens to realise their
potential, was reinterpreted by some Marxists as a means of ensuring that the ten-
dency towards growing inequality was tempered through guaranteeing sufficient
consumption to undermine revolutionary consciousness.

What does the Australian ruling class do when it rules?

Australian Marxists have challenged the egalitarian liberal ideal that the state repre-
sents the interests of all Australians. They argue that the Australian state serves the
needs of capital accumulation, ensures that existing social relations are conducive to
the smooth operation of the market mechanism, and placates class conflict. As Kuhn

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 257) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

(2005: 45) argues, ‘in an important sense, the state is capital’ and power is a reflection
of existing class relations.

While social liberals hail early federal minimum wage legislation as a sign of progres-
sive social cooperation between the state, workers and business owners, Marxists con-
sider it a class compromise that diluted the growing revolutionary potential of the
working class. Social liberalism gave organised labour in Australia the illusion that they
had a stake in the nation and its industrial expansion. For Marxists, the idea of ‘the
national interest’ is an ideological construct that masks the reality of class power. Indeed,
the White Australia policy encouraged Australian workers to view non-European
workers as low-wage competitors for their jobs. Thus, unlike social liberals who tend
to treat the relationship between the state and market as a dichotomy where the state
regulates the ‘natural’ tendencies of the market, Marxists view the market as a social
relationship requiring state oversight to reduce social tension.

Some Australian Marxists have drawn on comments by the Russian revolutionary
leader Vladimir Ilych Lenin who described the Australian Labor Party (ALP) as
‘petit-bourgeois’, rather than representative of workers’ real interests. From this
perspective, most Australian unions and the ALP have, at best, represented the
demands of labour as a commodity, rather than attempting to transform the
labour-capital relationship through overthrowing the capitalist system.

However, there is another Marxist perspective that views the state as less
instrumental. According to Anderson (1965), it is possible for progressive parties,
including labour parties, to attain government and threaten the interests of capital.
However, when this occurs, the power of capital is brought to bear on such a
government. Conservative governments govern in concert with financial power.
However, if a ‘labour government is in power, it is a spot-lit enclave, surrounded on
almost every side by hostile territory, unceasingly shelled by industry, press and orches-
trated “public opinion” (1965: 45-6). While parliament is the ‘formal site of political
power’, the real location of power is made apparent if a government ever threatens the
general interests of capital.

In his book Oil in Troubled Waters, Jim Cairns (1976), former deputy prime
minister under the Whitlam Labor government, argued that Anderson’s argument
applied not only to the dismissal of the Whitlam Labor government in 1975, but also
to the Chifley Labor government after it attempted to nationalise the banks in the late
1940s, as well as to the removal of Labor governments in 1913, 1917 and 1931. This
argument was also made by R.W. Connell and T.H. Irving (1976) in their evocatively
titled exposé on capitalist power, “Yes, Virginia, There is a Ruling Class’, which
attempted to dispel the myth that Australians lived in a classless society protected by
a neutral state. Hollier (2004: xvi) pointed to the ‘direct and more subtle ways’ in
which power operates in contemporary society through both the state and ISAs:
“When business leaders act to achieve their industrial and financial aims they usually
have the broad support of government. With the exception of the ABC, the mass
media is owned by the leaders of big business and can be brought on board to fight
the political battles of business...’

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 257)

Connell’s (1977) book Ruling Class, Ruling Culture presented other illustrations of
hegemony, exploring the various means whereby capitalist rule is naturalised. People
come to view existing social arrangements as normal through the way the media, the
educational process and parliamentary representation portray everyday life.
While social liberalism views the transformations in Australian society since the
1980s as an ideological battle for state control in which neo-liberals have gained promi-
nence over the social liberals who built the structures of Australian egalitarianism,
Australian Marxists consider this process to be the reconfiguration of the state to serve
the needs of contemporary capital accumulation. The neo-liberal state has acted to
intensify class exploitation through eroding workers’ conditions, imposing more
regressive taxation, limiting the impact of climate-change legislation on carbon-intensive
industries, and by increasingly privatising, marketising and corporatising more areas
of social life—in effect, expanding the reach of commodification. commodification
Both the ALP and the more conservative Coalition governments have justified this seeds and peoletecome
restructuring of Australian society by arguing that there is no alternative but to subjecttothe laws of
implement market-friendly policies or else lose international competitiveness. “? irre cpt ,

Marxists, however, consider this an act of bad faith. Governments have acted in the _ inceasingly commodities social
. . telationships.
interests of capital.

li THE RATIONAL BASIS OF MODERN POWER LO3 Analyse Weberian

and elitist approaches
to power
Weber and authority
While Marxists and liberals debated the ideals underpinning the liberal democratic
state, the German sociologist Max Weber drew attention to the role of rationality in
influencing the development of modern state power. From Weber’s Theory of Social
and Economic Organization (1964: 152), classical sociology received its most oft-cited
definition of power. As sociology was concerned with explaining meaningful behav- power
iour, Weber explored how those who possessed power received their authority. the potty thaton ace
Authority, for Weber, was the form through which power was legitimated. For example, _ ina social relationship will be in
in 1939 Hitler had the power to overrun Poland, but he had no authority to do so. 2 positon fo cary out thelr Wi

despite resistance, regardless

Weber distinguished between three types of authority throughout history. First, ofthe basis on which this
"traditional authority—the norm before the advent of modernity—rested on custom, "°°"
Acquiescence tended to be based on codes of practice justified on the grounds that
this was how people behaved in the past. Adherence to religious texts or obedience to
the word of hereditary rulers made people’s assent to rulers meaningful. The sanctity
of the past was the guide to present action.
Second, Weber identified charismatic authority, which was based on adherence to
the authority of individual leaders perceived to possess extraordinary powers. Such
leaders often appeared in times of social malaise, where traditional authority was
undermined and people sought alternative sources of guidance. While pre-modern
societies were more susceptible to the call of charismatic authority, Weber did not
restrict charismatic leadership to the past, believing that it could appear under
modern conditions. The rise, after Weber’s death, of Hitler added weight to this

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 257) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

modern significance of charismatic authority. Other figures throughout history
imbued with such authority include Jesus of Nazareth, the prophet Mohammed, the
leader of the Taiping Rebellion Hong Xiuquan, Martin Luther King and Nelson
Mandela. Eventually, however, charismatic authority tends to become routinised into
either traditional or, in modern times, legal authority.

This third type of authority was the form that has increasingly come to dominate
modern societies, including liberal democracies, as the process of rationalisation pro-
gressed (see Chapter 16). Weber also labelled this form of
authority. Increasingly, the political basis for meaningful action has rested on an
impersonal codification of procedures that must be followed in order to be consid-
ered legitimate. This form of authority has advantages that correspond to the liberal
ideal of equality before the law. These conditions, where written, transparent, impar-
tial and abstract rules must be followed, act as a check on tyrannical behaviour. No
individual, regardless of their charisma, class power or privilege, can impose their will
if it contravenes institutionalised rules. All individuals have the opportunity to
advance their personal or organisational interests as long as their actions are consist-
ent with the rules. Unlike charismatic and traditional authority, this impersonal,
bureaucratic, legal-rational authority is deaf to the claims of individuals outside the
scope of the authority of office. Obedience is not owed to any particular person, but
to ‘an impersonal order’ (Weber 1964: 330).

While this form of rationality is consistent with the liberal belief in equality before
the law, and even though Weber acknowledged that legal-rational authority held
advantages in improving the modern world, his overriding view of bureaucratic ration-
alisation was pessimistic. Weber believed that bureaucratisation would eventually
undermine the freedom of modern individuals by ensnaring them in the logic of an
impersonal system, or an ‘iron cage’, that limited their scope for creativity. Thus, while
Weber could accept much of the liberal view of how modernity emerged out of the
tyrannical authority of the past, he ultimately parted with it concerning predictions for
the future. The impersonal logic of modern bureaucratic power could become opaque,
wilful and capricious, a possibility explored by the Czech novelist Franz Kafka in
The Trial (1976), where the main character, K, is prosecuted for an offence that he is
unaware of having committed, by an obscure, impersonal, unfathomable organisation.

Elites and managerialism

Weber (1964: 334) argued that the bureaucratic type of organisation was not unique
to the modern state apparatus but could be applied ‘with equal facility to a wide vari-
ety of different fields’. During the 20th century, many sociologists drew on Weber’s
insights into the rationalisation of modern life to suggest that industrial society
invariably led to hierarchical organisation. This position qualified the liberal ideal of
democratic progress under capitalism and the Marxist prediction of collective work-
ers’ control under socialism.

One of the most influential expressions of this position came from a student of
Weber, Robert Michels ([1911] 1949). Looking at the potential of modern democracy,

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 257)

he analysed the most radical mainstream political party in pre-World War I Germany,
the Marxist-inspired Social Democratic Party (SDP), reasoning that the democratic
spirit and practices would most likely be discovered within this organisation that
aspired to build a truly democratic society. Michels’ observations of the German DSP
revealed a hierarchical organisation where those at the apex wielded more power than
those at the base. This deviation from democratic practice was not the result of the
usurpation of the party by tyrants or hypocrisy on the part of the leaders. Michels
argued that once any large modern organisation exceeds a membership beyond close
personal acquaintance, top-down hierarchical authority inevitably will prevail in
order for the organisation to function effectively. Michels extended this finding more
generally to ‘the iron law of oligarchy’.

Michels’ study became one of the classical statements of elite theory, associated
with the Italian social scientists Gaetano Mosca and Vilfredo Paereto. They rejected
liberal and Marxist optimism that progress led to democracy, arguing instead that the
history of all hitherto existing societies could be discovered in ‘the circulation of
elites’. Modern society could not escape this reliance on elites, no matter how they
might justify their power under modern democratic conditions. Sociological analysis
of power, therefore, should not look to expressions of the general will (liberalism) or
class struggle (Marxism), itical

Mosca 1939).

A more radical form of elitism emerged after World War II, when C. Wright
Mills (1956) applied Weber’s concept of rationalisation to study the interconnected-
ness of the largest US institutions. Like Michels, he studied an exemplary case to
measure the distance between the rhetoric of democratic power and the reality.
Mills claimed that, despite its self-proclaimed status as the champion of global free-
dom and the democratic way of life, the United States exhibited oligarchic tenden-
cies. He identified three powerful loci of US power—politics, business and the
military—and revealed their ideological and personnel connections. Mills labelled
this hierarchical and informal decision-making body the ‘power elite’. Domhoff
(2013) continues to argue that contemporary US power relations operate along the
lines documented by Mills.

If, as Weber and Michels argue, no modern large-scale organisation can avoid the
logic of bureaucratic hierarchy, then a corollary to this is that the behaviour of those
who hold power at the apex of organisations must become increasingly alike. Mills
observed the interchangeability of elites between the military, business and politics.
The skills required to run any organisation have become increasingly standardised
and routinised. Those occupying these positions of power have been labelled a
‘managerial class’, and modern power has been characterised as ‘managerialism’. McDonaldisation
Similar attributes are required from those who administer the country, command the 4 term coined by sociologist
armed forces, run a university or operate a hamburger franchise. Indeed, the sociolo- the cotemporay tendency
gist George Ritzer (1996) has referred to this contemporary phenomenon as the  formore and more social
‘McDonaldisation-of-just-about-everything’, including politics and the conduct of — (llonshipste become

bureaucratised and
the state. standardised.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 257) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO4 Explain why
Foucault's approach
to power challenged
previous state-centred
analyses

Elites in Australia

Elite theory was used by John Higley and his colleagues to examine stratification and
inequality in Australia in a study entitled Elites in Australia. Higley et al. (1979: 3)
defined elites as people who hold strategic decision-making positions within influential
organisations. The study located Australia’s elites in business, politics, the bureauc-
racy, trade unions and professional organisations, as well as in influential organisations
such as churches and educational bodies (what they called ‘ideological elites’-—people
who shape our ideas). They then interviewed these elites to discover how they made
their decisions. Did they seek advice from others among their membership, or from
elites in other organisations? The researchers found that, when making important
decisions, elites from different interest groups spoke to each other just as often as they
spoke to their membership. They contacted each other regularly, but informally, on
important national issues. In other words, communication channels were horizontal
as much as vertical. Following Michels, these findings seem to qualify liberal
democratic ideals.

Whose interests were these elites representing? And why did such horizontal elite
communication across organisations occur? What processes allowed communication
to occur so frequently across elites? According to Higley et al., elites tended to come
from the same background: most were male, middle-aged and wealthy. Furthermore,
75 per cent were Protestant, most came from families with high-status occupations,
and they had similar educational backgrounds.

While this arrangement might compromise Australia’s egalitarian ideals (see
Chapter 2), Higley et al. argued that it had positive effects on political and social
stability. Among these elite decision-makers there was a shared agreement about the
rules of politics, which avoided major social disruption. Australia, Higley et al. claimed,
was ruled by a ‘consensual elite’, and this helps to explain why Australia has relatively
low levels of political conflict, even though economic inequalities persist. Under condi-
tions where elites do not relate to each other, do not seek advice from other elites on
important matters and rely principally on the mobilisation of their own interest group,
there was likely to be widespread and incessant social conflict. Finally, the methodol-
ogy employed by Higley et al. bears a strong resemblance to that adopted by the
Australian Financial Review Magazine in constructing its annual ‘power lists’ (refer to
Table 11.1). The logic behind this type of research assumes that elites are best at
identifying the influential networks that constitute modern power.

lm FOUCAULT AND THE RECONCEPTUALISATION OF POWER

The approaches to power examined so far in this chapter tend to assume power to be
a possession wielded by legitimate, hegemonic or authoritative social groups. They
also assume that the state is the locus of power, except for Marxists who view the state
as an epiphenomenon of class power. This focus on the state explains why so much
political philosophy from Hobbes onwards engaged with the search for the origins of
state power.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 257 )

More recently, sociological analysis associated with the French theorist Michel
Foucault has reconceptualised the relationship between power and the state,
suggesting that power be considered a more diffuse concept. One consequence of this
argument is that the state is not considered the exclusive focus of power. Another
consequence is that power should not be considered a tool that individuals or groups
possess. Power, Foucault emphasises, is a social relationship and the state is as much
an effect of networks of power relationships as it is the source (McHoul & Grace
1993: 21). This section will therefore introduce Foucault’s concept of power and
explore examples of its usefulness to the sociology of the state.

Foucault’s understanding of power developed from his historical investigations
into how particular forms of knowledge, or discursive practices, came to represent the
‘truth’. His studies of psychiatry and madness, medicine and illness, criminology and
punishment, sexuality and sexual norms, explored the many facets of how the modern
world was constituted, leading to a reconceptualisation of power relations in all their
micro-manifestations.

Foucault avoided looking for the ‘origins’ of how power was invested in certain
‘sovereign authorities’. Instead, he began his analysis through studying historically
constituted social values and institutions, and the types of knowledge that reinforced
them. Rather than search for the origins of power, Foucault directed attention to its
consequences. These effects can best be studied in all micro-social relations, rather
than in macro-level state structures and institutions (Smart 1985: 79). This shift in
emphasis marked an important development in approaches to power. Foucault did
not assume that the state was defined by certain predetermined functions for social
existence. Neither was power not held or usurped by any institution such as the state,
nor was it a structure or a class effect. Instead, it is ‘the name that one attributes to a
complex strategical situation in a particular society (Foucault 1982: 93).

For Foucault, the analysis of this ‘strategical situation’ should begin ‘from below,
in the heterogeneous relationships that make up everyday social practices (Jessop
2007: 36). This was what he called the ‘microphysics of power’. Because power “comes
from everywhere’, the only way we can analyse it is through its overall effects on social
relationships. His analysis focuses on how particular processes of subjection emerge
and are maintained, rather than on the subjects who wield power (McHoul & Grace
1993: Ch. 3).

As Jessop (2007: 36-7) notes, rather than viewing the state as ‘an autonomous
source of power’, Foucault regards it as ‘an emergent and changeable effect of
incessant transactions’. This alters the understanding of power from a coercive to a
productive relationship, one that constitutes individuals, rather than ordering,
controlling and manipulating them. Authorities do not possess or wield power (as
Weber implied), but are inscribed in the very practices that establish their authority.

Foucault was interested in the way certain discursive practices helped shape social
relations and shape what passes for knowledge—such as chastity and perversity,
normality and deviance, conformity and non-conformity, health and morbidity,
sanity and insanity—and how reality was understood in different epochs. Normality

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 257) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

regimes of truth

A discursive framework that
allows one group to assert
authority over others through
their ability to impose their
definition on a situation or
phenomenon, or even an epoch,
making this perspective seem
natural or real.

docile bodies

Michel Foucault's term for the
way in which physical selves
have been disciplined in such a
way that people accept a
particular discursive framework
as a ‘regime of truth’.

was defined through regimes of truth, or a knowledge/power nexus, that names
things as it produces them as ‘real’ (Foucault 1991: 73-5). Power, then, has a fluid
quality that circulates through the social body, rather than being located within a
central authority.

In the same way that Weber observed a historical trend from traditional authority
to rational-legal authority, Foucault distinguished between sovereign power and
disciplinary power. The former characterised pre-modern power and bears some
resemblance to Weber’s ‘traditional authority’ (Foucault 1997: 273-4). Increasingly,
disciplinary power has come to characterise the modern age since the 18th century.
This power is focused on the art of administration and through more elaborate sur-
veillance over the life course, beginning with birth, and moving through child-rearing,
household management, education, nutrition, sexual behaviour, fitness and sickness,
hygiene and death. This disciplinary power produces modern reality.

Like Weber, Foucault studied the emergence of particular productive forms of
rationality that have come to dominate social practices, although he considered that
Weber employed too general a notion of rationality (2001: 229; Smart 1985: 138). Like
Durkheim, he claimed that all societies required a particular understanding of
deviance that identified acceptable social practices and defined normality. Like Marx,
he was aware that these practices could be used to justify and maintain certain
exploitative or repressive relations (Jessop 2007: 40; Lemke 2007).

In each of his historical studies, Foucault charted how the authoritative voice of
some (such as doctors, wardens, psychiatrists) produced the subjection of others. In
this way, the scientific knowledge of madness, health and illness, science, punishment
and sexuality became modern regimes of truth.

Power performs a highly complex and ambiguous role in Foucault’s analyses of
modernity. Doctors, prison officials and psychiatrists, for example, are presented
both as crusaders seeking to reform archaic and barbaric practices, while simultaneously
employing their authority to perpetuate the problems they set out to solve (Kurzweil
1980: 196; Smart 1985: 24). However, these experts do not hold power. Rather, they
are people ‘through whom power passed or who are important in the fields of power
relations’ (Foucault 2001: 356). They are implicated as subjects of the very knowledge
they objectify as truth, and create the very knowledge that they proclaim as natural
and normal. In effect, power perpetuates its own mystification (Kurzweil 1980: 222).

This modern scientific knowledge has become a technique reshaping modern
bodies and minds. For example, in Discipline and Punish (1977), Foucault charts the
move from pre-modern punishment centred on the body to modern punishment
masked as the judgement and salvation of the soul. This is accomplished through
‘correction’ of the behaviour of the transgressor in such a way that the subject of the
transgression comes to a self-awareness of the transgression as abnormal.

In this manner, modern disciplinary power is exercised through a variety of
institutions—from prisons, factories, hospitals and parliaments, to schools, sport and
art—in order to create docile bodies attuned to the practices of large-scale,

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 271)

mechanically disciplined, industrial life. The widespread use of disciplinary techniques
such as surveillance, normalising judgement and examination (a normalising gaze)
focused on bodily behaviour is referred to by Foucault as ‘bio-power’ (Smart 1985: 85).

The governmentalised state becomes an important element of this disciplinary governmentalised
power from the 19th century onwards (Foucault 2001: 326-48; Jessop 2007: 38). sere cntal ractated trounh
“Governmentality’ accompanies the development of the idea of the individual subject, the strengthening capacity to
with individual responsibilities, individual rights and individual ‘pin numbers’. This wonton inptov ad oversee
individual, the ‘elemental nucleus’ of liberalism, is for Foucault (1980: 98) an effect of populations.
modern disciplinary power relations. Modern subjectivities are constituted by
governmental practice, rather than being the source of modern government.

The Foucauldian approach has been used to illustrate how regimes of truth
name the practices of certain marginalised groups as ‘problematic’ while veiling
the repressive practices of experts and institutions. For example, Zizek (2009: 1)
explores how the contemporary discourse over ‘security’ emphasises the violence
of those who resist the state, while ignoring the violence that state policies inflict
on groups of workers through unemployment and liberalising markets. He distin-
guishes between the ‘subjective violence’ that can be traced to specific agents and
the ‘systemic violence’ that is needed for the ‘smooth functioning of our economic
and political systems’. Others have focused on how the social-liberal welfare state
distinguished between the ‘deserving poor’ and the ‘undeserving poor’ to create a
more docile working class. On an international scale, Escobar (1995) has explored
how postwar development discourse on third-world poverty came to redefine
post-colonial countries as a problem requiring management and regulation by
Western powers.

Foucault considered that, without resistance, power does not exist (Foucault
1982: 95). In this sense, he was less pessimistic than Weber, for whom modernity
meant the ‘iron cage’ of rational discipline. Foucault distinguished between the dis-
ciplinary techniques of modernity and the disciplined subjects of these techniques
who could never quite be fully captured (Smart 1985: 106). However, while resist-
ance, like power, is everywhere, Foucault never articulated its manifestations into a
more anti-systemic framework for structural change. He was unable to accept the
Marxist prediction that working-class resistance would lead towards freedom and
emancipation. Marxists, in response, have been wary of Foucault’s conceptualisation
of power as being ‘everywhere’ without emphasising that it was unevenly distrib-
uted. Some groups and institutions seem more equal than others—capital, men,
even the state.

However, it is misleading to systematise Foucault’s ideas too rigidly. Foucault saw
the desire to systematise ideas as ‘simply the outcome of a lack of integrity, regarding
systematic thought as merely a replica of the repressive social order itself’ (Turner
1986: 180). Systematising Foucault could be interpreted as an instance of the very
practice of power that this section of the chapter is investigating. Rather than
understanding Foucault’s views as a fully fledged theoretical position, his work is best

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 271) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO5 Apply

liberal, Marxist

and Foucauldian
approaches to the
process of globalisation
and the future of the
nation-state

globalisation

The spatial expansion of capital
and commodity relations along
with the removal of a range

of nationally based regulatory
features that characterised
economic growth during

the long postwar boom
(1945-1970), such as fixed
exchange rates, protectionist
state borders and nationally
embedded capital.

democratic deficit

A condition where people
within supposedly sovereign
states lose the ability to control
their own affairs.

supranational
organisations
Organisations invested with
powers to regulate or control
affairs within and between
groups of nation-states—for
instance, the United Nations
(UN), Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC), North
American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), European Union (EU),
International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank.

engaged in as a spirit of enquiry that forces the researcher to be more attuned to their
own embeddedness in particular regimes of truth.

Mi THE STATE OF THE FUTURE

The Foucauldian turn, advocating a decentring of the state in analyses of power,
coincided with significant global socioeconomic and political changes that sociologists
began to observe during the 1980s. Just as Foucault was suggesting that social
scientists turn their attention to governmentality rather than state institutions, the
postwar interventionist welfare state was being challenged by a neo-liberal dominance
that emphasised small government, free market policies and a proliferation of
non-state actors (Fraser 2003). In this final section, these changes will be explored
through the lenses of neo-liberalism, social liberalism, a Foucauldian perspective and
Marxist perspectives.

The rise of neo-liberalism during the 1970s and 1980s was associated with the
process of globalisation, where parts of the world’s economy became increasingly
interconnected (see Chapter 13). The deregulation of national economies that
accompanied these changes made governments more outwardly focused. More rapid
transportation, microelectronic transactions and deregulated markets facilitated the
mobility of capital. Unless governments took ‘market discipline’ more seriously,
capital would move to more competitive locations. The consequences of these
changes for state power were made evident by the former president of the World
Bank, the Australian James Wolfensohn, when he noted the extent to which, under
globalisation, market pressure rather than government power influences national
affairs: “The harsh reality of a global market is that policy failures are punished hard
through currency movements, shifts in market share, and, ultimately, through
fluctuations in employment and wage levels’ (World Bank 1995: iii).

The promise of global competitiveness and generalised wealth was held out to
those governments that accepted this neo-liberal logic. Friedmann (2000) referred to
this as the ‘golden straightjacket’—the promise of affluence to all states that live
within its disciplinary constraints. As unfettered trade created a ‘borderless world’,
Ohmae (1990) predicted ‘the end of the nation state’.

While neo-liberalism applauds ‘rolling back the state’, social liberalism considers this
trend an attack against the 20th-century struggles to secure social citizenship and the
welfare state. While they do not necessarily oppose globalisation, social liberals argue that
nation-states that embrace neo-liberalism (liberal market economies) are less egalitarian
and less participative than those that facilitate a broader consultative approach to the
market (coordinated market economies) (see Hall & Soskice 2001). Social liberals express
concern that the market discipline hailed by neo-liberals results in a democratic deficit.

Market discipline is only one force restricting the power of the nation-state. A
range of supranational organisations underpin the regulatory framework of
market-oriented globalisation. For example, many indebted countries over the past
30 years have been forced to accept unpopular policy recommendations from the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank as a condition for receiving

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 271)

loans. These policy conditions invariably involve liberalising local markets, privatis-
ing state concerns and removing state subsidies for basic goods. This supranational
economic governance is the lubricant that facilitates global capital mobility, but
simultaneously promotes fears of a democratic deficit.
The emergence of ‘global governance’ has been enhanced through the creation of
other supranational governance bodies ranging from regional trade agreements (EU,
APEC, NAFTA) through to the United Nations. Furthermore, all liberal democracies are
members of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the global body with the function of
arbitrating the rules of global trade. The constraints on state action imposed by agendas
external to the state have led some commentators to predict ‘the end of state sovereignty’.
For example, Camilleri and Falk (1992: 256) predicted that even though the state will not
disappear, ‘the theory of sovereignty will seem strangely out of place in a world charac-
terised by shifting allegiances, new forms of identity and overlapping tiers of jurisdiction’.
The effect of these processes on the way sociologists understand the state has led
Scholte (2000: 315) to claim that ‘globalisation has rendered methodological methodological
territorialism obsolete ... and requires us substantially to rethink social theory’. sroppeathu the socal
While these statements suggest a significant loss of authority, Held and McGrew sciences that assumes
(2002: 18) are more circumspect, claiming that the contemporary world of nation- Ursasstebethe normal

unit of analysis. Most
states and subnational and supranational institutions has led to a reconfiguration of sociologists until recently

political power best characterised by ‘multilayered regional and global governance’. en teat
Thus, there are multiple perspectives within the liberal tradition on the future of  ‘s*eties.
the nation-state, ranging from neo-liberal triumphalism over its demise to social-
liberal concern over the same fate. Yet, across this divide, there is also disagreement
concerning the extent to which state power has been eroded and sovereignty ceded.
Galligan et al. (2001: 19) summarise the parameters of this debate, noting that while
nation-states ‘remain the primary promoters and regulators of global capitalism’, it is
still necessary to avoid ‘overstating’ their power because they have ‘limited degrees of
freedom in regulating capitalism at the domestic level in a neo-liberal environment’.
Foucault always denied that sovereign power lay with the state, and for this reason
a Foucauldian analysis searches elsewhere for an understanding of the significance of
market-led globalisation. The Foucauldian approach to governmentality is less inter-
ested in the ‘decline of state sovereignty and more focused on particular administra-
tive practices, such as the ‘promotion of forms of government that foster and enforce
individual responsibility, privatised risk-management, empowerment techniques,
and the play of market forces and entrepreneurial models in a variety of social
domains’ (Lemke 2007: 3). Foucault’s more diffuse concepts of governance and gov-
ernmentality are well suited for an analysis of power within a discursive framework
that emphasises ‘market discipline’, ‘individual initiative’, ‘personal responsibility’
and ‘self-management’. Neo-liberal forms of governmentality elevate individual sub-
jectivities, partly by increasingly disembedding citizens from more local and national cosmopolitan
networks of identity formation. Globally mobile people are faced with the challenges  anopenness to cultural
and possibilities generated by the disciplinary power of cosmopolitan practices  M%tonadunamilar socal

practices. Cosmopolitanism has

(Lehmann 2014). Meanwhile, people excluded from the wealth generated by global __ increased with globalisation.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 273) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

uneven and combined
development

Refers, in Marxist analysis,

to the way in which

capitalism does not develop
simultaneously across
nation-states or even within
nation-states. One consequence
is the tendency for different
levels of wages and conditions
across the world.

capital increasingly come under the surveillance of state and private security concerns
(Fraser 2003: 166).

Marxism provides another explanatory framework for market-led globalisation,
approaching the state as class-based power. In The Manifesto of the Communist Party
(1848), Marx and Engels predicted that the process of capital accumulation would
subject the entire world to its domination through the ‘cheap prices of its
commodities’ and give a “cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in
every country’ by destroying ‘old-established national industries’ and promoting the
‘interdependence of nations’ ([1848] 1977: 46-7). The emergence of newly industri-
alising countries and the creation of a new international division of labour appear to
have fulfilled their prediction that locally embedded capital would be replaced with
international flows of capital.

According to some Marxists, the globalisation of capitalism has undermined the
relevance of the nation-state as the ‘committee for managing the common affairs of
the whole bourgeoisie’. The dominant fractions of capital are those linked to the
most productive and profitable sectors of global capital, for whom the nation-state
is a hindrance that sub-optimises capital gains. For this dominant group of global
capitalists, global governance is necessary and this requires a transnational state
that oversees the global economy, rather than a system of nation-states. Sklair
(2001) and Robinson (2004) argue that a transnational capitalist class has become
the global ruling class. It consists of the executives of transnational corporations
and executives of supranational institutions such as the IMF, the World Bank and
the WTO. These new forms of global governance represent an emergent transna-
tional capitalist state.

This argument reinforces an important conceptual distinction made at the begin-
ning of this chapter between the state and the nation-state. As Robinson (2001: 157)
points out, ‘the state and the nation-state are not coterminous’. The nation-state was
the instrument best suited for the historical task of overthrowing feudalism and estab-
lishing the capitalist order within territorial boundaries and annexing colonial pos-
sessions. However, by the beginning of the 21st century, the needs of capital
accumulation have outgrown this form of state, and market globalisation demands a
new form of power consistent with the interests of the transnational capitalist class.
Overall, therefore, many Marxists concur with social liberals on the reality of the
decline of the nation-state while evaluating its significance in terms of class power,
rather than in terms of its being a setback for the universalisation of democracy,
liberty and security.

Not all Marxist-oriented commentators accept that the nation-state is in decline.
For instance, Wallerstein (2004: 24) argues that the spatial expansion of capital and
the growing importance of transnational corporations are not inconsistent with the
ongoing importance of the nation-state. This argument rests on the Marxist concept
of uneven and combined development. If the price of labour everywhere was equiva-
lent, then this would enhance workers’ ability in collective bargaining to improve

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND THE STATE t 271)

their wages and conditions. The uneven nature of capitalism enhances capitalist
exploitation through allowing capitalists to play one set of workers off against the
others. The existence of nation-states remains an important structural element of
global capitalism, ensuring nation-states and/or their workforces are forced to com-
pete to provide the most competitive conditions to attract capital. Thus, while capital-
ism requires an expanding global market, it also maintains a system of nation-states:
‘the more universal capitalism has become, the more it has needed an equally univer-
sal system of reliable local states’ (Meiksins Wood 2005: 152).

CONCLUSION

The debates over the future of the nation-state suggest that power and the state will remain realms of
sociological controversy. This is despite the fact that, or perhaps because, the death of the nation-state has
been greatly exaggerated. The classical approaches to understanding the nature of the state and power, along
with the emergence of newer approaches such as that of Foucault, can be accommodated through appreciating
that each asks different questions and directs sociological analysis to different features of social existence.
Among these questions, the following stand out as representative of liberal, Marxist, Weberian, elitist and

Foucauldian ongoing concerns relating to power and the state. Does this history represent: the story of the
struggle for individual liberty and equality before the law; or the struggle by the capitalist class to hold on to
their privileges against their class adversary, the proletariat; or the process of growing universal rationalisation;
or the struggle between elites to manoeuvre for power; or the mutation of specific rationalities, discursive
frameworks and the will to know?

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

1. What are the key differences between classical liberalism and social liberalism? (LO1)

2. Has liberal democracy served Australia well since Federation? (LO1)

3. Is it more accurate to describe Australia as a capitalist state or a liberal democratic state?
(LO1 and LO2)

4. Does the prominence of business leaders who appear on the AFR Magazine's ‘overt power list’

reinforce the Marxist claim that real power resides outside parliament? (LO2)

5. Thirty years ago, Higley et al. found that Australia’s elite was dominated by wealthy, middle-
aged, male Protestants. What changes can you observe since then? (LO3) j
6. What are the advantages and disadvantages of Higley et al.’s methodology for identifying
power? (LO3)
7. Is liberal democracy a ‘regime of truth’ constituting citizens as ‘individuals’? (LO4)
8. Why is disciplinary power more effective than sovereign power in administering modern
populations? (LO4)
9. Does cosmopolitanism free individuals from the power of the state? (LO5)
10. Compile your own Australian ‘power list’. What does your list reveal about the nature and
distribution of power in Australia? (LO1, LO2, LO3, LO4 and LO5)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

P werERENCES

Althusser, L. (1971) Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays, New York, Monthly Review Press.

Anderson, B. (1991) Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of Nationalism, London,
Verso Press.

Anderson, P. (1965) Towards Socialism, London, Fontana.

Bottomore, T. (1984) The Frankfurt School and its Critics, London, Tavistock.

Cairns, J. (1976) Oil in Troubled Waters, Melbourne, Widescope International Publishers.

Camilleri, J. & Falk, J. (1992) The End of Sovereignty?, Aldershot, UK, Edward Elgar.

Connell, R.W. (1977) Ruling Class, Ruling Culture, Melbourne, Cambridge University Press.

Connell, R.W. & Irving, T.H. (1976) ‘Yes, Virginia, There is a Ruling Class’, in H. Mayer & H. Nelson (eds), Australian
Politics: A Fourth Reader, Melbourne, Longman Cheshire, pp. 81-92.

Cornell, A. (2013) ‘Australia’s Top Power Brokers Revealed’, Australian Financial Review Magazine,
25 October.

Domhoff, W. (2013) Who Rules America?, 7th edn, New York, McGraw-Hill.

Escobar, A. (1995) Encountering Development, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.

Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, London, Penguin.

Foucault, M. (1980) Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972-1977, London, Harvester.

Foucault, M. (1982) The History of Sexuality, Volume 1, London, Penguin.

Foucault, M. (1991) ‘Truth and Power’, in P. Rabinow (ed.), The Foucault Reader: An Introduction to Foucault's
Thought, London, Penguin.

Foucault, M. (1997) Ethics: Essential Works of Foucault, Volume 1, London, Penguin.

Foucault, M. (2001) Power: Essential Works of Foucault, Volume 3, London, Penguin.

Fraser, N. (2003) ‘From Discipline to Flexibilisation? Rereading Foucault in the Shadow of Globalisation’,
Constellations, 10(2), pp. 160-71.

Friedmann, T. (2000) The Lexus and the Olive Tree, New York, HarperCollins.

Fukuyama, F. (1992) The End of History and the Last Man, New York, The Free Press.

Galligan, B., Roberts, W. & Trifiletti, G. (2001) Australians and Globalisation: The Experience of Two Centuries,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Gramsci, A. (1980) Selections from the Prison Notebooks, New York, International Publishers.

Greig, A.W., Lewins, F. & White, K. (2003) Inequality in Australia, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Hall, P. & Soskice, D. (2001) Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of Comparative Advantage,
Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Held, D. & McGrew, A. (2002) Globalization/Anti-Globalization, Cambridge, Polity Press.

Higley, J., Deacon, D. & Smart, D. (1979) Elites in Australia, London, Routledge Kegan Paul.

Hobhouse, L.T. ([1911] 1977) Liberalism, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Hobsbawm, E. & Ranger, T. (eds) (1992) The Invention of Tradition, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Hollier, N. (ed.) (2004) Ruling Australia: The Power, Privilege and Politics of the New Ruling Class, Melbourne,

; Australian Scholarly Publishing.

» ] Hume, D. (1987) Essays: Moral, Political and Literary, Indianapolis, Liberty Fund, available at <http://www.

=. econlib.org/library/LFBooks/Hume/hmMPLCover.html>, accessed 14 May 2014.

Jessop, B. (2007) ‘From Micro-Powers to Governmentality: Foucault’s Work on Statehood, State Formation,
Statecraft and State Power’, in Political Geography, 26, pp. 34-40.

Kafka, F. (1976) The Trial, London, Penguin.

Kelly, P. (1992) The End of Certainty, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Kuhn, R. (2005) ‘Illusions of Equality: The Capitalist State’, in R. Kuhn (ed.), Class and Class Struggle in Australia,

Sydney, Pearson Longman.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 11 POWER AND

Kurzweil, E. (1980) The Age of Structuralism, New York, Columbia University Press.

Lehmann, A. (2014) Transnational Lives in China: Expatriates in a Globalising City, Basingstoke, Palgrave.

Lemke, T. (2007) ‘An Indigestible Meal? Foucault, Governmentality and State Theory’, in Distinktion:
Scandinavian Journal of Social Theory, 15, pp. 43-64.

McHoul, A. & Grace, W. (1993) A Foucault Primer: Discourse, Power and the Subject, Melbourne, Melbourne
University Press.

Marshall, T.H. (1977) ‘Citizenship and Social Class’, in Class, Citizenship and Social Development, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press.

Marx, K. & Engels, F. ([1848] 1977) The Manifesto of the Communist Party, Moscow, Progress Publishers.

Meiksins Wood, E. (2005) Empire of Capital, London, Verso Press.

Michels, R. ([1911] 1949) Political Parties, New York, Collier.

Mills, C.W. (1956) The Power Elite, New York, Oxford University Press.

Mosca, G. (1939) The Ruling Class, New York, McGraw-Hill Book Company.

Ohmae, K. (1990) The Borderless World, London, Collins.

Ritzer, G. (1996) The McDonaldization of the World, Thousand Oaks, CA, Forge Pine Press.

Robinson, W.I. (2001) ‘Social Theory and Globalisation: The Rise of a Transnational State’, Theory and Society,
30(2), April, pp. 157-200.

Robinson, W.I. (2004) The Theory of Global Capitalism, Baltimore, MD, Johns Hopkins University Press.

Sawer, M. (2003) The Ethical State: Social Liberalism in Australia, Melbourne, Melbourne University Press.

Scholte, J.A. (2000) Globalisation: A Critical Introduction, Basingstoke, UK, Palgrave.

Sklair, L. (2001) The Transnational Capitalist Class, Oxford, Blackwell Publishers.

Smart, B. (1985) Michel Foucault, London, Tavistock.

Turner, B. (1986) ‘Foucault and the Crisis of Modernity’, in Theory, Culture and Society, 3, pp. 179-82.

Wallerstein, |. (2004) World-Systems Analysis: An Introduction, Durham, NC, Duke University Press.

Weber, M. (1964) Theory of Social and Economic Organization, New York, The Free Press.

World Bank (1995) World Development Report 1995: Workers in a Changing World, New York, World Bank/Oxford
University Press.

Zizek, S. (2009) Violence, London, Profile Books.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 12

RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY

os
a

™@ This chapter raises a number of questions about the role of religion in contemporary
Australian society. It examines religion from a sociological perspective and explores —
whether religion is as significant today as it was in the past. ,

™@ The chapter begins by examining what we mean by ‘religion’ and showing that a var‘
definitions exist, each with their own strengths and weaknesses. The difficulties as
with distinguishing between religious and non-religious meaning systems are discussed.

—™ The perspectives on religion of the ‘founding fathers’ of sociology—Durkheim, Marx and
Weber—are described. Durkheim’s focus on the functions of religion, Marx’s view that r
is epiphenomenal (that is, a consequence of material conditions) and Weber’s view that
religion can be a causal factor in social change are all discussed. |

BH Religion and social change are further explored through a discussion of both sides of
secularisation debate. The secularisation thesis has received much criticism in recen
it is argued that a relatively sophisticated understanding of secularisation is required
to understand how the relationship between religion and society has changed under
conditions of modernity and postmodernity. i

® Anexamination of religious identification in Australia provides the basis for a more
exploration of the transformation of religion in the form of the growth of non-Christian
religions, new religious movements and New Age religions/spiritualities.

BH Finally, a discussion of religious fundamentalism locates the phenomenon within the
of uneven modernisation that characterises contemporary globalisation. It is argued
understanding of international terrorism is deepened through a sociological under:
of the relationship between religious fundamentalism, nationalism and global ineq

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Define religion and discuss the difficulties
distinguishing between religious and non-

religious meaning systems 7

LO2 Summarise Durkheim's, Marx’s and Webe
perspectives on the significance of religior
society

LO3 Compare and contrast both sides of the ~
secularisation debate .

LO4 Identify broad changes in religious J
identification in Australia since World War i

LO5 Recognise new expressions of spirituality
religious fundamentalisms as responses
uncertainties associated with postmo
uneven modernisation and globalisatio

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Soci


CHAPTER 12 RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY t 27; )

Is the significance of religion increasing or decreasing in contemporary Australian
society? A quick examination of rates of church attendance over the past 50 years
would lead many to conclude that, for the majority of Australians, the relevance of
religion has been steadily declining since World War II. On the other hand, our daily
newspapers regularly report on issues relating to religion, from terrorist attacks by
Islamic fundamentalists to debates surrounding the ordination of women in
Christian churches to the concern expressed over young people’s growing interest in
witchcraft and the occult. The British sociologist of religion Steve Bruce argues that
‘the modern urban industrial societies of Western Europe, North America, and
Australasia ... are considerably less religious than the formations that preceded
them’ (1996: 25). (Quotes from Bruce are reproduced with permission of Oxford
University Press.) On the other hand, in his description of contemporary Australian
society, Gary Bouma ‘sees religion thriving—spiritualities springing up in profusion
and a host of meaning oriented activities and centres offering guidance, healing and
companioning for the journey of life’ (1992: 5). At the same time, census data show
that witchcraft, paganism and nature-based religions are the fastest-growing reli-
gious groups and forms of spirituality in Australia today. It would seem, then, that
understanding the role of religion in contemporary Australian society is not a
straightforward exercise.

Sociologists of religion are interested in the relationship between religion and the
wider society. They are interested in such questions as: How relevant is religion to the
lives of people in the society? How do people make their lives meaningful? What is
the relationship between religion and other institutional structures in the society?
What is the role of religion in social change? In addressing these questions sociolo-
gists examine the formal and informal religious life of the people. Their task is not to
evaluate the relative truth claims of the religions they study; rather, they are interested
in identifying the complex relationships that exist between religion(s) and society.
Importantly, they recognise that every religion develops within a specific societal
context, so that religions that appear to be similar often operate very differently in
different nations. Hassan’s (2002) study of Islam is an excellent illustration of this
point. His research shows wide variation in Muslim practices in countries such as
Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Egypt and Pakistan. The issue of religious diversity is one that
we will tackle again later in this chapter. Let us begin, however, by asking the question:
What is religion?
| WHAT IS RELIGION? LO1 Define religion

TE and discuss the
One of the key problems that confronts sociologists of religion is the difficulty in difficulties in

answering this simple question. Social scientists have been attempting to develop an “'stinguishing between
religious and non-

adequate definition of religion for a long time, and debates over its essential religious meaning

characteristics continue. Broadly speaking, however, definitions of religion can be

divided into two types: substantive and functional. Substantive definitions focus on

what religion is. They define certain beliefs, actions and feelings as ‘religious’; for

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 2: ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

example, a ‘belief in spiritual beings’ (Tylor 1958). In his studies of religion, Bruce
develops a substantive definition of religion:

Religion ... consists of beliefs, actions and institutions which assume the existence
of supernatural entities with powers of action, or impersonal powers or processes
possessed of moral purpose. (1996: 7)

Functional definitions focus on what religion does and how it affects the wider
society; for example, religion provides answers to questions of ultimate meaning, or
religion binds people together as a community (Davie 1999). An example of a
functional definition is that provided by Cox (1973, cited in Bouma 1992: 9):

Religion is that cluster of memories and myths, hopes and images, rites and customs
that pulls together the life of a person or group into a meaningful whole.

There are problems with both kinds of definition. Substantive definitions may fit
well with the understanding of religion held by people in Western societies, but
religious beliefs and practices in some non-Western societies may not fit within such
Western frames of reference. As Bruce notes:

Where people daily commune with the spirits of their ancestors or take steps to
avoid ubiquitous witchcraft, it may not be easy to discriminate the natural from the
supernatural in the minds of those concerned. (1996: 7)

Functional definitions, however, tend to include a whole range of beliefs and prac-
tices that do not seem at face value to be religions—for example, ideologies that
address the ultimate problems of existence, such as ecological or green movements;
or ‘certain forms of nationalism which undoubtedly provide collective frames of
meaning and powerful inspiration for the populations involved’ (Davie 1999: 279).
Functional definitions have been criticised for a lack of analytical clarity that leaves us
unable to ask some important sociological questions. Critics argue that if all beliefs
and practices are defined as religions, then it is not possible to ask such questions as:
is it possible for a society to operate without religion? (Bruce 1996: 7).

In reviewing several definitions of religion, Bouma identifies their common
characteristics. First, he argues that they are all meaning systems:

In one way or another they all see religion as providing meaning, binding together the
disparate elements of personal or community existence into some sensible, defensible,
meaningful whole. (1992: 10)

Second, they almost always involve ‘a reference to something beyond, something

more, something ultimate’, and for him ‘it is this transcendent element, this link with the
beyond that distinguishes a religious from a non-religious meaning system’ (1992: 10).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 12 RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY @®

Mi THEORIES OF RELIGION

Sociologists have been interested in the relationship between religion and society
since the beginning of the discipline. Durkheim, Marx and Weber all viewed religion
as a significant aspect of social life that was being disrupted by the rapid industrialisation
occurring in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Thus, for them, religion was an
aspect of social life that required a sociological analysis. The following section
provides an overview of their analyses of religion.

Durkheim: Religion is a necessity in all societies

Emile Durkheim’s comprehensive sociological analysis of religion was published in
1912 as The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. His definition of religion is both
substantive and functional. For him, religion is

... a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things, that is to say
things set apart and forbidden—beliefs and practices which unite into one single moral
community called a Church, all those who adhere to them. (1964: 62)

There are a number of key elements of religion identified in this definition: first,
religion is shared; it is not possible for religion to be purely personal or individual;
second, religion involves both beliefs and practices; and third, religion is oriented
towards the sacred. The distinction between the sacred and the profane is fundamental
to his view of religion and society. Profane objects are part of the world of everyday
life; they belong to the natural world. Sacred objects, on the other hand, are separated
from everyday affairs; they belong to and include the supernatural world. As such they
are treated cautiously and reverently—with awe—and we typically engage with these
sacred objects through rituals. Objects become sacred through a process of sacralisation:
that is, the process of making something sacred, of identifying something as spiritually
important. It follows, then, that the objects viewed as sacred vary between religions and
between societies. In totemic societies, such as Australian Aboriginal societies, animals
are sacred objects. In Christian societies, sacred objects include a wooden cross.

Durkheim analyses religion from a functionalist perspective. (See Chapter 16 for a
more comprehensive discussion of Durkheim’s theories.) For him, religion will
always exist in any society because it performs necessary functions. These are:

H Religion promotes social integration.

™@ Religion provides a source of emotional support and meaning for individuals in
times of stress.

™@ Religion provides reinforcement for norms by giving them moral legitimation.
(Waters & Crook 1993: 374)

Marx: Religion is an agent of social control

Karl Marx argued that religious ideas were the product of material conditions (social
and economic relations) in society; in other words, he viewed religion as a dependent

LO2 Summarise
Durkheim's, Marx's and
Weber's perspectives
on the significance of
religion in society

profane
Mundane and ordinary;
encountered in everyday life.

sacred
Extraordinary; belonging to the
supernatural world.

sacralisation

The process of making
something sacred, of identifying
something as spiritually
important.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

ideology

Aset of socially determined
beliefs, values and opinions
that Marxists have suggested
function towards maintaining
and ‘naturalising’ the ‘status
quo’. Together with education,
legal and political apparatuses,
the media is one of the most
central institutions with a role
in the circulation of ‘dominant’
ideologies. In relation to media,
John B. Thompson has usefully
defined ideology as ‘meaning in
the service of power’.

variable. For Marx, religion was necessary in a society in which people cannot find
contentment in the natural world. One of the central concepts in Marx’s theory of
society is that of alienation. (See Chapter 16 for further discussion.) While most of his
work focused on the way in which wage labour in a capitalist society created alienation
by turning people into commodities, his early work focused on religion as a source of
alienation. Further developing the work of his colleague Feuerbach, Marx viewed
religion as a form of false consciousness, which was an obstacle to social change.
For Marx, religion acts as a powerful agent of social control by diverting people’s
attention away from the pain and suffering they experience in the material world as
a consequence of the exploitative nature of relationships in capitalist society.
Furthermore, by persuading people that these relationships are ‘natural’, religion
serves as an ideology that legitimises the current social order and ensures that people
do not act to change it. In Marx’s words:

Religious suffering is at the same time an expression of real suffering and a protest
against real suffering. Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the feeling of a
heartless world, and the soul of soulless circumstances. It is the opium of the people.
(Marx 1977: 64)

For Marx, religion would not be necessary in the new post-capitalist society
because there would be no injustice or inequality. In the new social order, religion
would ‘wither away’ along with the family and the state.

Weber: Religious ideas produce social change

While Marx argued that religious ideas are the product of material conditions in society,
Max Weber argued that religious ideas affect the social and economic order: in other
words, that religion is an independent variable. In his comparative analysis of religions,
The Sociology of Religion (Weber [1922] 1963), he shows the impact of world faiths on
everyday (including economic) behaviour. For Weber, religion effects social change. In
The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1976), Weber demonstrates this argu-
ment through an analysis of the rise of industrial capitalism in Europe (see Chapter 16).
Weber began his analysis by asking: “Why did rational capitalism develop in
Western Europe and England in particular rather than elsewhere in Europe or other
parts of the world?’ (Bouma 1992: 47). He noted that these societies were similar in
terms of wealth, raw materials and other economic factors, but different in terms of
the religious beliefs held by the people in them. He went on to identify that capitalism
emerged where the Protestant theology of Calvinism was the prevailing idea system.
Thus, he argued that Protestantism, and Calvinism in particular, provided the
motivational basis for the emergence of rational capitalism. Importantly, however,
once capitalism was established, a religious motivation was no longer required in
order for it to be maintained. Let us examine this argument in a little more detail.
According to Calvinist theology, God is all-powerful (omnipotent) and all-knowing
(omniscient). He is also transcendent and therefore unknowable in this world.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 12 RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY @®

Waters and Crook (1993) describe three implications of this theology. First, it fol-
lows that if God is omnipotent and omniscient, salvation is a matter of predestina-
tion and God knows who will be going to paradise—that is, who will be in the select
group known as the ‘elect’. Second, as God created the world, Calvinists believed
that work should always be for the greater glory of God; and third, ‘Calvinists must
imitate Christ in his piety and his asceticism or willingness to forgo the pleasures of
the flesh’ (Waters & Crook 1993: 537-8). Weber then applied the methodological
device known as Verstehen to explore how Calvinists who hold these beliefs would  verstehen
feel and behave. He argued that this would create anxiety about salvation in the Mea Wetes they races Y
minds of the faithful, who would thus be motivated to look for a sign that they were _ placing oneseifin the position
predestined to heaven. How could membership in the elect be demonstrated? The wordt that perspec,
answer lies in work. (As the Bible states: “By their works ye shall know them.’) Thus,
material success, particularly success in business, came to be seen as a sign of elec-
tion. Calvinists also believed that the whole of one’s life should be dedicated to God.
This led to the notion of bookkeeping and rational economic planning so that one
could demonstrate how every aspect of one’s work and life glorified God.
Furthermore, as asceticism was valued, the profits made from economic success
could not be spent on luxury and indulgences; rather, they were reinvested in work
which, in turn, led to further success in business. Weber called this orientation to the
world ‘the Protestant ethic: systematic this worldly activity in the pursuit of salva-
tion’ (Waters & Crook 1993: 538).
The other part of Weber’s argument rests on his identification of the key
components of what he calls the spirit of capitalism. These are, first, ‘acquisitiveness,
an orientation in which persons seek continuously to possess more material things;
second, reinvestment, a commitment to continuously use profits to increase capital
rather than to consume them; and third, systematic accounting practices of which the
earliest example is double-entry bookkeeping’ (Waters & Crook 1993: 538). Weber
argues that ‘the Protestant ethic’ and ‘the spirit of capitalism’ encompass similar
orientations to this world, and thus similar behavioural patterns. In his words, there
is an ‘elective affinity’ between them. Importantly, Weber notes that it is not the hold-
ing of specific beliefs that is important but ‘the way these beliefs are interpreted and
applied by the community (Bouma 1992: 49). As Bouma makes clear:

Belief in predestination by itself is not likely to lead to the work ethic. It is when this
belief is linked to the belief that success in business may be interpreted as a sign of
God’s favour that the belief in predestination begins to have social consequences of the
sort Weber suggests. (1992: 49)

For Weber, then, Protestantism played a causal role in the rise of capitalism in
Western Europe. Industrial capitalism took off where the Reformation (especially the
Calvinist Reformation) had had its greatest impact. Once capitalism ‘took hold’, how-
ever, a religious orientation was not required to sustain it. This leads Weber to a very
pessimistic view of life in a secular capitalist society. Without a religious belief system

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

rationalisation

The process whereby all spheres
of culture become influenced by
ends-guided or ‘instrumental’
rationality. Central to this
process is the elevation of the
values of efficiency, control and
predictability over moral and
aesthetic values.

disenchantment

The loss of a sense of magic,
mystery, prophecy and the
sacred that is associated with
the development of industrial
capitalism.

LO3 Compare and
contrast both sides
of the secularisation
debate

secularisation

The process in which religious
thinking, actions and
institutions lose their
significance in society.

individualism

A collection of ideas and
practices that emphasise
the importance of the
individual over and above
collective entities.

that gives meaning to one’s behaviour, social life in a capitalist society is characterised
by rationalisation and disenchantment. It is experienced as an ‘iron cage’ (Weber
1976: 181). Weber describes the experience of secular capitalism as follows:

The Puritan wanted to work in a calling; we are forced to do so. For when asceticism
was carried out of the monastic cells into everyday life, and began to dominate
worldly morality, it did its part in building the tremendous cosmos of the modern
economic order...

No one knows who will live in this cage in the future, or whether at the end of this
tremendous development entirely new prophets will arise, or there will be a great
rebirth of old ideas and ideals ... For of the last stage of this cultural development it
might well be truly said: ‘Specialists without spirit, sensualists without heart; this nullity
imagines that it has attained a level of civilization never before achieved.’ (1976: 181-2)

i RELIGION AND SOCIAL CHANGE

As we have seen, the role of religion in social change was a core concern of the early
sociological theorists. Contemporary sociologists are also keen to understand the
relationship between religion and social change that is often examined in terms of ‘the
secularisation debate’.

The secularisation debate

Secularisation is understood as the process whereby religion loses its significance in
modern societies. Modernisationist theorists took the view that secularisation was an
inevitable and universal aspect of the process of modernisation. In other words, they
held the view that as societies modernised, religion would become less important as
an aspect of social life. More recently, however, this view has been challenged by
other sociologists of religion, who point to the rise of new religious movements, the
increasing emphasis on spirituality, and the significance of religion in political events
around the globe. Let us examine the arguments in favour of, and against, the
secularisation thesis.

The secularisation thesis

Steve Bruce is a strong proponent of the secularisation thesis (see also Dobbelaere
1981; Wilson 1982). The following discussion is based predominantly on the
arguments in his book Religion in the Modern World (1996), in which he describes the
ways in which the Reformation contributed to the erosion of religion in the modern
world. We will make use of Australian data to examine how useful this view is for
understanding the role of religion in the Australian context.

For Bruce, the Reformation laid the foundations for ‘modernity’ by encouraging
individualism, creating the need for ordinary people to become better informed about
their religion, and contributing ‘to the rationalization of the world, the growth of

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 12 RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY @®

modern science, and the fragmentation of once dominant religious cultures’ (1996: 23).
One of the key features of the Reformation was the introduction of a very different
relationship between God and ordinary people than that which dominated the
pre-Reformation era. In pre-Reformation times, this relationship was mediated by ‘a
small number of highly trained officials’ (Bruce 1996: 2). In contrast, Reformation
theology introduced an individual relationship between God and ordinary people. This
produced a number of effects, including a shift in power from religious officials to the
laity and the move away from a consensus about just what was God’s will. This opened
up an era of debate and competition between groups with differing views in the early
modern period, followed by a further fragmentation of religious world-views in late
modernity. The terms ‘church’, ‘sect’, ‘denomination’ and ‘cult’ have been applied to
describe this shift in the structure and influence of religion associated with modernisa-
tion. As Bruce explains:

... if the church was the dominant form of religion in the pre-Reformation world,
the sect its embodiment in the early modern period, and the denomination its classic
form in the twentieth century, the emblem of religion for the twenty-first century is
the cult. (1996: 4)

It is this shift in the form of religion and its relationship to the society as
a whole that is referred to as ‘secularisation’. It summarises the transformation
from a universal religious world-view shared by the members of a single society
to the fragmentation of religious world-views in contemporary societies, a
shift that has been triggered by the process of rationalisation and the growth
of individualism.

Typically, the secularisation thesis is supported through data that show a decline
in religious identification and in church attendance. What do the Australian data
reveal in relation to this?

Table 12.1 shows the changing patterns of religious identification in Australia.
Broadly speaking, it shows a decline in identification with mainstream Christian
churches, together with a growth in the proportion stating ‘no religion’. It is these
changes that have been viewed as evidence of the secularisation of Australian society.
It is important to note, however, that ‘religious identification’ refers to the answer
people give to the census question, “What is your religion?’. Critics of the secularisa-
tion thesis have pointed out that this does not tell us whether people hold religious
beliefs or not. ‘Religiosity—the importance of religion to people, or how religious
they are—is much more difficult to measure.

Critiques of secularisation

Some sociologists of religion (for example, Bouma 1992, 2006; Cahill et al. 2004;
Hughes 2001; Mason et al. 2005; Tacey 2002; Webber 2002; Possamai &
Possamai-Inesedy 2007; Williams 2007) do not accept the view that religion is losing
its significance in modern societies. Their critique of the secularisation thesis

church

A large-scale formal religious
organisation that is typically the
dominant (or only) religious
organisation in the society.

sect

Asmall-scale, informal religious
group that typically aspires to
personal inward perfection and
direct fellowship between
members.

denomination

A formal religious organisation
that is one of anumber
available to the members of

a single society.

cult

Asmall, flexible religious group
characterised by individualism
and an emphasis on private,
individual religious experience.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


