t 136 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO3 Discuss the
impact of education
on the individual and
on social mobility

reproduction theory
A theoretical perspective in
sociology that explores ways in
which particular institutions (for
example, schools) are engaged
in reproducing the status
quo—the society we already
have. Part of this process is to
persuade young people to fulfil
the social expectations of
them so that children from
working-class families do not
aspire to becoming barristers
and children from upper-class
families do not contemplate
entering working-class
occupations.

Q: How much freedom do you think schools should be allowed to exercise in terms
of what they teach? Is it reasonable for religious schools, for example, to promote
creationism as opposed to evolution, or to refuse to teach sex education to teenagers?
Q: Would you welcome the establishment of charter schools in Australia? Would they lead
to a growth of non-mainstream schools? Can you think of any particular community

whose needs might be much better met by a charter school?

the subculture of their own family (see Chapter 4). These social expectations can
involve, at a base level, such things as the understanding that it is inappropriate to
swear at adults, that the child must do as an adult asks, and so on.

Later on, of course, young people are inducted into a much more complex range
of social expectations, which involve what kind of level of education they will
require to achieve full membership of their socioeconomic group, how the ‘shared
culture’ perceives their ethnic community, and how gender is to be developed. Once
again, these social expectations are not unproblematic and have been the source of
heated debate. As with so many other parts of contemporary Australia, education is
a site of struggle.

Maintaining norms

One answer to the question “What is education for?’ was provided by a series of writ-
ers in the 1970s and 1980s, whose work collectively came to be called ‘reproduction
theory’. As the name suggests, their studies of schools and students explored the ‘sort-
ing house’ role of the school and the ways in which children were selected—or
self-selected—to achieve success or failure.

The most famous early example of this approach was Bowles and Gintis’ book
Schooling in Capitalist America (1976), in which they argued that the role of educa-
tion in capitalist economies is largely to reproduce a compliant labour force which
has the skills the economy requires, and this is achieved through both the curricu-
lum and the hidden curriculum. Think about the ways in which the school day
mimics a day in the workforce, for example, the way in which students’ studies are
called ‘work’, the ways in which high schools organise students into those who will
be successful and those who will not be, the ways in which children’s physical
experiences are ordered (standing up, sitting down, in rows). Not surprisingly, the
curriculum is used to produce people with the right vocational skills: in the 21st
century, for example, it is more useful economically for students in Australia to
learn Japanese than it is for them to learn Latin, because of our economic links with
Japan; so they learn Japanese.

According to Bowles and Gintis, the hidden curriculum works in a more complex
and subtle way but nevertheless has a very important result for capitalist economies—
a workforce that can undertake the required tasks and a workforce that is subservient

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION t 136 )

(think about the comments above about building students’ compliance levels). This
subservience is produced through children learning, initially, about hierarchies in
schools: they must obey older students with formal responsibilities (prefects, for
example, or school captains) and their teachers; classroom teachers do as the head of
their faculty asks them; heads of faculties are subject to the assistant principal; and the
assistant principal answers to the principal. Aside from this formally recognised hier-
archy, there are informal ones. Jim Walker, in his book Louts and Legends (1988), for
example, did a longitudinal study on the subcultures of boys at a working-class school
in Sydney. He divided the boys into four main groups in terms of their position in an
informal hierarchy of masculinity and ethnicity. (See Chapter 5 for a comprehensive
discussion of ethnicity.) He called these groups the ‘footballers’, the ‘Greeks’, the
‘three friends’ and the ‘handballers’. They ranked themselves in accordance with their
sporting and scholarly achievements, but mostly in terms of their relative masculinity
which was most pronounced among the footballers. The footballers asserted both
their masculine superiority but also their ethnic or racial superiority (as they saw it),
naming others as ‘wogs’, “coons’ and ‘chows’. In this way, then, there is both an
explicit and an implicit ordering of power among students and staff in the school—a
hierarchy that reflects those found in the wider society.

At school, according to Bowles and Gintis, it is also important that children learn
to become motivated by external rewards. Perhaps the best example of such rewards
is the marks awarded by external examiners at the end of Year 12. These marks are
the motivation for students to study for months, if not years. They are evidence of
individuals being assessed by someone unknown to them and of their “doing well’ in
an objective sense. Arguably, this trains them to seek approval of others they do not
know—their employers in a large corporation, for example—by working similarly
hard for them.

Finally, the curriculum is constructed to develop in young people a sense of frag-
mentation, which is continued within the workforce and makes employees easier to
control. Knowledge, then, is divided up into discrete packages, which inhibits a
person’s ability to make meaningful connections between these packages: history,
literature, social studies and legal studies might all, for example, deal with the same
issue but in separate ways. This encourages students to have a fragmented under-
standing of the issue and to not understand the ways in which it interacts with its
context, and appears quite separate from the students’ personal experiences. In addi-
tion, knowledge in schools is hierarchically and gender ordered, with much greater
prestige given to subjects based on the abstract than on the concrete. In all Australian
states, for example, ‘masculine’ subjects such as science and maths are scaled up in the
calculation of a student’s Australian Tertiary Admission Rank (ATAR) score, while
subjects deemed ‘feminine’ such as art, drama or music are scaled down.

In another pivotal book that explored some of the ways in which schools prepared
young people for the workforce, Paul Willis looked at the ways in which working-
class boys in England saw their school. (Like others, this research was based on boys.
Later feminist critiques offered a more comprehensive approach by both examining

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 136) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

social mobility

The movement of an
individual between different
social classes—usually in a
hierarchical sense. This

can be measured both within
an individual's lifetime and
between generations (that is,
whether an individual occupies
a higher or lower position in the
class structure than his or

her parents did).

microculture
Asmall-scale subculture that
operates in a wider context. In
schools there are a number of
microcultures to which both
teachers and students belong.
Commonly, a microculture has a
set of unwritten rules relating
to membership of the group, to
authority and to the behaviours
expected of members.

epistemology

The study of ‘how we know’
what we are studying. This area
of sociology is concerned

with the ‘methodology’ of the
social sciences. Is sociology a
‘science’ in the same way as the
natural sciences are? How

does sociology overcome the
problem that the researcher is
part of the social world he or
she is examining? Can sociology
be value-free or theory-neutral?

why girls had been left out of the discussion and undertaking the work required to
make the discussion inclusive.) Willis was aware that the education process was not
one that was simply done fo children, but one where children themselves produced
their own outcome, albeit in a way determined largely by their class membership (see
Chapter 2). In Learning to Labour (1977), then, he followed a group of boys through
their last two years of schooling and into the workforce—as the title suggests, into
manual labour. He concluded that, to a large extent, it was the culture of the boys
themselves (rather than being merely the culture of the school) that directed them
into manual work. For the most part, these boys rejected school. They were highly
resistant to the authority of the school and the teachers, and consequently were often
‘in trouble’. They believed that schools were not meritocracies but favoured those
from the middle class. But they were also very fatalistic about their futures: they knew
they would become manual labourers and felt, because of this, that the school had
nothing useful to teach them. They were also admiring of such labour and were not
particularly interested in social mobility. Lastly, they believed that it was important
to bond with their mates and to form relationships that would sustain them into
adulthood. Like Jim Walker (1988) and Mac an Ghaill and Haywood (2007), Paul
Willis found that the boys formed themselves into microcultures, which had a class
identity and which were often oppositional, in culture, to the school (see In Focus 6.2).
(See also Haywood & Mac an Ghaill 2013 and Landreau & Rodriguez 2012 for a fur-
ther exploration of this field.)

The reproductive relationship between schools, students and the wider social con-
texts in which they live and work was explored by Connell et al. in Making the
Difference (1982). Here they ‘set out to do something a bit different: to get close to the
situations people found themselves in, to talk to them at length about their experi-
ences. We thought it was vital to learn what actually happened, and what they actually
did, in their working lives and in relation to schooling’ (Connell et al. 1982: 29). Their
work expanded the analysis of education in three new ways: first, by looking at the
ways families influence the students’ attitude to education and the ways in which this
assists in the positioning of students in terms of achievement; second, by paying close
attention to the ways in which gender determines a child’s educational experiences in
addition to social class; and third, by looking at a government school populated by the
working class and a private school that served the rich. The emerging picture is one
where class, gender and the educational aspirations of families are crucial, not only to
what happens to a child in school but also to how a child responds to what happens.

Other writers at this time were dealing with the way gender regimes were con-
structed and regulated in schools. Dale Spender’s work in Invisible Women (1982)
and Learning to Lose (with Elisabeth Sarah) (1980) forms part of an important corpus
of material that mapped out the boundaries of the feminist critique of the patriarchal
education system. The titles focus primarily on secondary schools in the United
Kingdom, and on epistemology, the hidden curriculum, power and, importantly, on
the educational needs of women. This was a paradigm shift, as prior to Spender’s
work equal opportunity discourse tended to fix on ways of enabling girls and women

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION t 136 )

to achieve better results in the existing education system. As a result of Spender’s
work, among others, attention became focused on the ways in which education ought
to be changed in order to cater more adequately for girls.

As a pair, these books offered a theoretical (Invisible Women) and a practical
(Learning to Lose) picture of the education system, and the feminist critique of it. This
critique focused on the argument that the curriculum did not include material about
women, or material generated or written by women, so that there was an effective
eradication of women from the intellectual culture of the society. In addition, it was
argued that the education system should be altered so that it not only caters for the
learning needs of girls but channels them into the areas of study that carry prestige
(maths and sciences) in order that girls can begin to wrest such avenues of power
from male-only hands (see Bromley 2012; Thayer-Bacon 2013). In more recent times,
it has been argued that the education system should be shaped to meet the needs of
boys, given that girls are now succeeding, while others see this as a sign of anxiety that
girls and women might outperform males and threaten male power structures as a
result (see Lingard et al. 2009).

li SECONDARY EDUCATION LO4 Explore the

impact of economic
rationalism on the
Competition is not always associated with economic markets. All economic markets different education

involve actual or potential competition to some degree but the reverse is not the case. sectors
Competition played a role in pedagogies and student ordering long before economic
markets entered education. Competition between students smoothed the way for the
extension of relations of competition to the organisational relationships in and between
institutions. It provided training in the attributes of mind necessary to sustain a more

broad-based, more intense and ‘purer’ struggle for supremacy. (Marginson 2000: 52)

The above discussion points to the way education came to be seen in the second half
of the 20th century. Through the work of sociologists who saw beyond the limits of
functionalist accounts of what education does, it became clear that education was
involved in a complex, yet understandable, relationship with wider society and its
economy. Importantly, by the 1970s, which saw an expansion of access to education
(through making higher education free for the first time), it is clear that education was
viewed as a key means of bringing about social change, in a variety of ways. First, indi-
viduals who came from disadvantaged backgrounds were not financially barred from
going to university because fees were abolished. This, it was argued, would facilitate
much greater social mobility in a changing economy, which was beginning to value
educational qualifications more than ever before. Second, it was thought that a better-
educated society would enrich the community through greater civic involvement and
through enabling traditionally disadvantaged groups such as women, migrants and
Indigenous Australians to become empowered by participating more fully in decision-
making bodies. Third, a more highly educated populace would be better equipped to
deal with the technological changes that were beginning to affect the labour market.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 136) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

economic rationalism
A form of economic reasoning
that took hold in the 1980s and
is based on the notion that the
free market is a much better
arbiter of economic and other
Matters than are governments.
Economic rationalism sees itself
as a science devoid, largely, of
social goals. The language and
logic of economics dominates
social policy, and a corollary of
such reasoning is a reduction in
spending by the state on such
things as education, health and
social welfare and the delivery
of the whole or parts of these
services by the private sector.

In the 1980s and 1990s, this last factor came to be seen as crucial by successive
federal governments that held the educational purse strings, and it came to dominate
educational policy. Like the area of health, education slowly came to be assessed in
terms of its economic performance. As D’Cruz and Langford argued as early as 1990
(when economic rationalism had begun fundamentally to restructure the way the
state operated), some of the results of these changes in thinking, organising and fund-
ing education profoundly changed the delivery of education.

First, the new emphasis on efficiency meant that more was achieved with fewer
resources, an example of which might be the increase in teacher/student ratios.
Second, there was a market orientation, which introduced the notion of competition
into education so that schools were seen as service providers and had to compete for
market share (that is, for students)—much as the private sector did (see Marginson
2000 and <www.myschool.edu.au>). In doing so, private schools, in particular, began
marketing themselves, as shown in the advertisement below.

Third, the state came to have greater control over education, introducing stand-
ardised national testing (the National Assessment Program—Literacy and Numeracy
(NAPLAN), for example), and productivity measures and incentives for teachers.
(This was also linked to the new market orientation, of course.) The final innovation
was ‘instrumentalism’. Less specific than the others, this term refers to the use of the
education system to produce more direct economic benefit. Consequently, the era in
which education was broadly perceived as a social as well as an individual good, which
could help people develop into creative, flexible, informed citizens, was at an end.

In place of this was the overshadowing view that education could produce people
to fill gaps in the labour market, so that education became more skills-based and
more vocational in its orientation. This new way of viewing the role of education
involved its reorganisation from a model where the educational principles that had
governed the education system in the past were increasingly encroached on by the
market principles of economy and efficiency. In addition, notions of a free market in
education (to ‘choose’ between the public and private sectors, for example, and
between individual schools themselves) came to dominate educational discourse,
and this facilitated a sea change where state authorities came to be subject to the

“Every day is different. That's what | love” ? ;

What's to love about MLC? Ask our students.

‘S

MLC

www.mic.vic.edu.au dlmemle

Courtesy of Methodist Ladies’ College, Melbourne, Victoria.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION t 136)

principles of free market capitalism and the private sector was provided with increas-
ing amounts of resources (Symes & Preston 1997).

This shift can also be seen in the development of Australia’s market for interna-
tional students at both secondary and tertiary levels—education was a product for
sale, but not simply as a good in itself; it included the social capital and cultural capi-
tal as a by-product of the good. Selling education to overseas students became a major
export earner—$12.6 billion in 2009 alone and the third most important export for
Australia after coal and iron ore (Access Economics 2010).

As the funding for universities was systematically withdrawn through the 1990s and
2000s, the shortfall was ameliorated by growing the international student market,
which, in turn, became an integral part of the planned funding for tertiary education
and a lucrative source of funds for some secondary schools. In 2012, for example,
21.3 per cent of all students enrolled in Australian universities were international
(Australian Education International 2013).

The increase in involvement of the private sector in state education has been an
issue of concern nationally since it began in earnest in the 1990s (see Marginson 2000).
Perhaps not surprisingly in an era of economic rationalism, it is argued that the
involvement of multinational corporations, in particular, is driven by market needs—
particularly the desire to increase the company’s market share among the young.
Perhaps the best and starkest example of this is the various interventions of the
American hamburger chain McDonald’s in the public education system:

m@ In New South Wales McDonald’s ran awards for the teacher and student of the
month. It also had ‘McHappy hours, where teachers were encouraged to serve stu-
dents at McDonald's outlets and 10 per cent of the income generated was donated
to the school.

@ In Victoria, McDonald’s announced that ‘satisfactory’ students who were trainees
could raise their Tertiary Entrance Ranking by gaining a bonus of 10 per cent of
their average best four Victorian Certificate of Education (VCE) marks.

m@ AFL stars were engaged to promote healthy eating and exercise in high schools, and
to casually mention their liking for McDonald's fast food for 15 seconds each visit.
The footballers were also accompanied on their visits by McDonald’s managers,
who handed out free muffins to schoolchildren at the conclusion of the talk.

m@ In 2009, McDonald's funded a nationwide online maths tutoring site designed to
assist high school students which was widely advertised on television using teach-
ers. By 2010, McDonald’s asserted that 50 per cent of the nation’s students were
using the site.

These cases make it clear that cash-strapped schools are being offered a means of
making up a shortfall in government funding; the second case is an example of private
enterprise and education becoming commercially and politically entwined in a way
never before seen in Australia.

Overall, there has been a change in the way education has been perceived, funded
and administered. Like other Western countries, Australia has fundamentally redrawn

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

cultural capital

A bank of knowledge about
power, both symbolic and
material, that individuals
inherit from their families.
Those from middle- and
upper-class backgrounds
find this bank of knowledge
fits neatly with that found in
schools, while those from
working-class homes find
themselves with a bank of
knowledge neither useful
Nor respected in the
education system.

the educational perimeters. Some of the features of these international changes have
been a centralising of the control of education into federal (or national) hands, a reduc-
tion of expenditure on education, an emphasis on the job market and the tailoring of
the education system to the needs of private enterprise, an increase in hierarchical and
horizontal streaming, an acceleration of privatisation, and the turning of the process of
education into a sequence of commodities. This has led some to argue that we should
review our perceptions about the function of schools altogether, and that schools are
now developing in an environment in which the factors of market economics are fun-
damental to their operation. Part of this paradigm shift has been the ideology that
schools and education have no intrinsic values in themselves but are useful as part of
the economy if they are cost-effective and can realise their value in the free market.

It should be clear from the above that secondary education is not always the value-
free, objective endeavour that many believe it to be—or, at least, hope it is. The kind
of education young people receive and the expectations young people have of their
education and their future largely depend on the wealth of their parents, and on the
‘cultural capital’ of their home.

In the next section, it is argued that education is a process riddled with sometimes
subtle yet purposeful inequality, and that it operates to advantage the already advan-
taged and to disadvantage the vulnerable, as can perhaps be most clearly seen in the
field of tertiary education.

li GENDER AND CLASS IN SECONDARY EDUCATION

The pattern revealed by the research evidence from a number of elite theorists is clear:
historically, the leadership of Australia’s major institutions has been drawn mainly
from, and shows every indication of continuing to be drawn from, a small group of
academically and socially selective schools located in the two major metropolitan
centres of the two largest states. (Gronn 2000: 88)

Although Australia attempts to typify itself as a society less dominated by class than
others, when it comes to an examination of the education system and the way different
social classes approach and utilise the education system it is clear that economic class
does matter. Indeed, it is possible to argue that different classes read different newspa-
pers, eat different food, watch different films and television shows, speak differently by
having different accents and using different slang, read different books, dress differ-
ently, have different leisure activities, live in different suburbs, have varying levels of
access to the internet and other communication technologies, and so on. These are all
indicators of class, a fact of which advertising companies are all too aware. Similarly,
which school you went to is (of course) an indicator of class and is linked, in a variety
of ways, to the lifestyle habits just mentioned. How are these things connected?

Two of the earliest writers to tackle this question were Bowles and Gintis, whose
analysis of the way education is instrumental in the maintenance of capitalism (1976)
was touched on earlier in this chapter. Bowles and Gintis were also interested in

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION t 136)

identifying the factors that predisposed the young to excelling in the education system.
Surprisingly, perhaps, they argued that there was no link between students’ levels of
intelligence and their scholastic success. A much stronger causal factor was their family
background—their class background, in particular. In other words, an extremely
intelligent working-class student was much less likely to do well at school than a less
intelligent student from a higher socioeconomic group. Furthermore, it seemed at the
time of writing Schooling in Capitalist America that the less well-off your parents were,
the less time you were likely to spend at school. Again, in the labour market of the 1970s,
Bowles and Gintis posited that there was not so strong a link between having high
qualifications and attaining a high position as you might suppose: people’s class back-
ground, sex and race also had a major impact on their appointment to senior positions.

So, what became clear from this was a contention and a question. The contention was
that education was not a meritocracy (and this is supported by the quotation that began
this section). The question that followed from this was: ‘If it is not intelligence that
determines educational success, then what does?’ Bowles and Gintis had themselves
partially answered this question by pointing to class, sex and race as key determinants
of educational success and then the labour market. Perhaps not surprisingly, the sugges-
tion is that the same bachelor degree will be more advantageous to a white, middle-class
man in the job market than it will be to an Indigenous, working-class woman.

The French writer Pierre Bourdieu developed the debate about the (almost) invisi-
ble but powerful relationship between the social and the educational by employing
the term ‘cultural capital’. Just as individuals inherit financial capital from their
families, they inherit cultural capital—a bank of knowledge and understanding about
communication, culture and power in the society in which they live, and how to
become successful.

One way of ascertaining the level of cultural capital in a child’s life is to measure
the following:

Whether they are taken to museums

Whether they are taken to concerts

The number of books in the home

Whether the child reads for enjoyment

Whether the child has extracurricular activities

Whether the child is encouraged to have hobbies (Jaeger 2010).

Census data show us how parents’ occupational levels and income levels, the sub-
urb in which they live and their children’s performance at school are very closely
linked indeed. Western, for example, argues:

Australian and overseas research into intergenerational class mobility consistently
finds that professionals and managers are disproportionately likely to come from
professional and managerial families of origin, largely because of the success with
which upper middle-class parents transmit educational qualifications and cultural
capital to their offspring. (2000: 96)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 136) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Bourdieu argued that schools are dedicated to advancing the middle and upper
classes and to alienating the working class from their education. Furthermore, he
asserted that the cultural capital absorbed through school is a crucial indicator of an
individual’s ability to gain paid employment and, consequently, social status (Bourdieu
1991). This alienation and elimination is achieved through the dissemination—from
the earliest years of the education process—of the cultural values and knowledges of
the dominant class, and the concomitant devaluation of the cultural values and
knowledges of the working class. Alongside this comes the legitimisation of these
values as being worthwhile, useful and meaningful. Indeed, on one level he is right,
because having particular knowledge in our society can provide access not only to
employment but to other resources as well.

Within a market economy, it is possible to view knowledge as being unevenly
distributed among different socioeconomic groups, age groups, occupational
groups and groups with different levels of power generally. The opposite is also
true, of course: if the social group of which you are a member does not have access
to the kinds of knowledge deemed important (technological, intellectual or linguis-
tic knowledge, for example), then it is highly likely, if not inevitable, that your
social group will have relatively low economic, political and social power in con-
temporary society.

Each child entering a school has already, of course, been shaped according to his or
her family and class expectations, and those from backgrounds most in tune with the
values inherent in the school will find themselves feeling right at home. These values
relate to such things as the virtues of diligence, politeness, knowledge, precision,
rationality and quietness. In addition, specific styles of behaviour and ways of talking
are greatly valued—the use of formal language instead of colloquialisms, of body lan-
guage that is deferential rather than challenging. Bourdieu argues that working-class
students are disenfranchised in even more subtle ways related to communication
styles: because a particular formal, bourgeois register or parlance (accent, inflection,
tone, vocabulary and grammar) is used in education, working-class students have
difficulty tuning in to what is being taught, whereas to middle-class students it seems
like second nature.

The sense of alienation that results from these indirect but crucial experiences that
working-class students experience in schools at the hands of their (usually well-
meaning and dedicated) teachers sets up a pattern that continues throughout their
school lives. When they reach the age of school leaving, one of two things is most
likely to happen to these students: they will either be eliminated from further study
by the lack of sufficiently good marks to continue, or they will themselves decide to
leave school. In either case, for most of them, their educational lives will have been
truncated by issues to do with class and cultural capital. Similarly, whereas the parents
of middle-class children teach them to understand the various communication codes
used in school, working-class parents are often quite clear about the ways in which
their children will be treated at school and, as a consequence, tend to choose to send

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION t 136)

their children to the local state school, which reflects most closely the parents’ own
perspective and provides the best support programs for students experiencing diffi-
culties (Connell 2004). In large Australian cities, this has meant for some time that it
is possible to predict a student’s ATAR (or OP in Queensland) score simply by find-
ing out his or her postcode (Brown 2013).

That is to say that through the combination of class advantages and the possession
of cultural capital enjoyed by the middle and upper classes (despite their levels of
intelligence), it is not difficult to use the geographical position of the family home as
an indicator of exam results. Taking Melbourne as an example, Richard Teese points
out that 25 per cent of girls living in a working-class area of the city and attending
public high schools will be in the lowest band for scores in English, whereas for simi-
lar girls living in a middle-class area and attending private schools, only 0.4 per cent
will get such a low score. For boys the differences are even greater, with 44 per cent
of those from working-class suburbs and public schools failing English but only
2 per cent of their middle-class counterparts doing so (Teese 2013: 63).

CREATING A RULING CLASS ELITE

Sociologists have researched the ways in which working-class boys make sense of their education,

their futures and the ways in which the school they go to prepares them for this (for example,
Willis 1977 and Walker 1988). But they have also looked at the other end of the continuum and
examined the culture of elite private boys’ schools and the ways in which they produce a specific
type of masculinity that is suited to elite occupations.

In Australia, such an examination was generated by an unusual case where two boys at an

necnnon

elite boarding school in Sydney were subjected to more than 75 sexual assaults by a group of four
older boys over a six-month period (Connelly 2000). The case came to light when one of the boys
(who was boarding at the school because both his parents had recently died) reported what was
happening to him and sought compensation (Walker 2003).

The school ‘itself in some ways responded like a blustering, bullying schoolboy—but
with adult ruling-class power and organisation to back it up. It began by delaying, minimising,
and controlling the disclosure of the wrongdoing. It attempted to cover up the incidents and
denied the existence of an established tradition which gave rise to them’ (Poynting & Donaldson
2005: 329).

It has been argued that elite private boys produce a special (and unusual) style of
hypermasculinity, which prepares the children of the rich for life in the highest echelons of
society, both socially and professionally. This style of masculinity is one created in opposition
to femaleness (or femininity, more particularly), colour and homosexuality. It valorises aggression
and competition and generates a masculine culture where the most aggressive and competitive
boys sit at the top, and those with less of these features are sometimes ruthlessly dominated—
such as the victims of the sexual assaults mentioned earlier.

Women are absent from such schools in any meaningful way, holding mostly service roles;

but more importantly, ‘feminine’ qualities such as empathy, nurturance, kindness or talking about

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 136 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

pedagogy
The study of teaching
methodologies.

feelings are seen as a mark of weakness and boys who display any of these are vulnerable to being
persecuted. Antagonism, contempt, joviality and triumph are permitted, however. In short, this
culture leads not only to a hypermasculine hierarchy, but also to the suppression of any kind of
emotional life that those outside this system would see as psychologically healthy and normal
(Poynting & Donaldson 2005). (See Chapter 4 for a broader discussion of the dynamics of gender.)
Q: Given that many of the leaders of industry, the law, the media, the public service, the
armed forces and various levels of government are graduates of such schools, what sort of
impact might this have on those institutions?
Q: Would it make a difference to our public institutions if their leaders came from public
schools and universities not in the top eight?
Q: Is this the same as asking whether more women, people from different cultures and classes

would reshape Australian society if they were able to be in positions of power?

So far we have discussed the class dynamics inherent in education. But, as Teese
(2013) points out, there is also a distinction to be made between the achievements
of boys and girls in contemporary high schools. There has been a good deal of atten-
tion paid to these differences in the media and in the academic literature, with some
arguing that the achievements of girls are improving to such an extent that schools
should introduce special programs to meet the needs of boys specifically—in short,
that it is about time boys received special treatment. But as Teese highlights, it is
middle-class girls who have been the chief beneficiaries of the feminist interventions
in the secondary school system, since they are the ones able to compete effectively
with middle- and upper-class boys for top school ATAR scores and top university
places (Teese 2013).

But as a group, it was girls who were perceived as being in need of special pro-
grams. It was argued in the 1970s, 1980s and, to a lesser extent, in the 1990s that the
education system was riddled with implicit and explicit barriers to girls achieving
their full potential. Some of these barriers were a culture in schools that valorised the
masculine and denigrated the feminine, a pedagogy that enabled boys to dominate
class time (and the teacher’s time) by disruptive behaviour, the marking of particular
subjects as ‘masculine’ (for example, maths and science) and others as ‘feminine’ (for
example, English literature or social studies), and an intellectual and pedagogical cul-
ture that suited boys rather than girls.

But it is simplistic to locate the problem solely within the realm of gender, and
although the media may emphasise the comparative achievements of girls in relation
to boys, the fact remains that although more girls than boys may stay on at school,
this is not necessarily a sign that they are doing better. First, it is often the case that
the celebrated data about girls’ achievement are based on the scores of a small and
select cohort from exclusive private schools. Second, when an overview is taken of
girls as a group, it is clear that many girls stay at school because their traditional
employment opportunities have dried up, and even when they enter the workforce

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION t 136)

with the same qualifications as their male peers they do less well, and this is not
changing (Archer et al. 2007).

When the data dealing with the comparative exam results of boys and girls are
looked at closely, it appears that educational achievement is linked as closely to the
students’ class background as it is to their sex (Arnot & Mac an Ghaill 2006; Francis
2005). In other words, not all girls are doing well, and not all boys are performing
poorly at school. Bob Lingard, Wayne Martino and Martin Mills, for example, argue
that when the data are examined carefully, they show: ‘A small group of mainly mid-
dle class girls are now performing as well as, and thus challenging, the dominance of
middle class boys in the high status “masculinist” subjects such as Maths, Chemistry
and to a lesser extent Physics’ (2009: 278).

The prominence given to this issue might well be one result of the new methods of
managing the education system, which emphasise the need for schools to perform
well in order to maintain student numbers and funding:

In the ‘structured’ education market, where school examination performance and
behavioural regimes are increasingly tied to reputation and recruitment, girls are a
valuable and sought after resource. Their performance in public examinations outstrips
that of boys and their presence in school normally conveys positive impressions to
parents about ethos and discipline. (Ball & Gewirtz 1996: 214)

‘Discipline’ is a frequently discussed issue in this debate and usually refers to the
efforts made by teaching staff to maintain it in the face of the male students’ resist-
ance, which is generated by a sense that to be scholarly (or to be hardworking, or
even to try) is threatening to their sense of masculinity. Consequently, being con-
fronting and badly behaved is seen as a way of increasing their masculine status
among their peers (Jackson & Dempster 2009). Some studies indicate that as much
as 80 per cent of both administrators’ and teachers’ time is taken up with managing
adolescent boys’ behaviour (Blaise 2005; Dalley-Trim 2006). Disruptive male behav-
iour is common in high schools, and one way of dealing with it is for male teachers
to control boys by relating to them in a particularly masculine way which, while con-
firming them as ‘one of the boys’, also maintains a hidden curriculum in which
‘macho’ culture is valued (see Poynting & Donaldson 2005). Such a culture bestows
an unofficial but ubiquitous power on boys and contributes to an environment in
which girls experience the boys’ privilege and are subordinated to their needs
(Datnow & Hubbard 2002).

In this section we have looked at the ways in which our secondary school system,
while aspiring to be a meritocracy, works to consolidate the class and gender disad-
vantage experienced by some students and, conversely, assist those from middle- and
upper-class backgrounds to achieve highly. As we have seen, this is observed most
powerfully in elite private schools. Let us turn now to the tertiary education system
and examine the ways in which its organisation works to make getting a degree easy
or hard—and what kind of degree you are likely to get.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 136) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

li TERTIARY EDUCATION

The ethos of the free market, which has been embedded in the Australian secondary
system, has perhaps been even more strongly embraced in the tertiary sector in two
major ways. First, successive federal governments (which carry the responsibility for
universities) have systematically reintroduced a ‘fee for service’ funding model which
means that students pay fees for university courses, and that the courses themselves
have often been restructured to better meet market needs. Unlike their counterparts
in other developed countries who invested heavily in higher education, Australian
federal governments have systematically withdrawn funding and placed a heavier
financial burden on students themselves and forced universities to look for other
income sources. These sources of funds were found via the international market, and
by their increasing commercial activity.

It is possible to view the public conversations around the role of universities in
contemporary societies as two divergent discourses. The first contends that educa-
tion is a public good, that an educated population have more satisfying personal and
professional lives and a much greater capacity to deal with changes in a market
economy. On this basis, it is the responsibility of government to educate its populace.
The second contention is that education is essentially a private good—it equips peo-
ple to earn more in the workplace. On this basis, the onus is upon the individual to
pay for their own education given that they will later reap the financial rewards for
having one.

The second way in which the free market has been embedded in the higher
education sector is through the establishment of competition for students among
universities, and perhaps more importantly, the ways in which universities have been
forced to brand themselves using marketing principles. (As we have seen, secondary
schools also do this, particularly those competing for an elite private market.) As
most universities offer a similar range of courses, their marketing focuses on a
similar range of qualities such as high-quality teaching, staff, research and facilities.
The eight elite Australian universities known as the Go8, or “Group of Eight’ (Sydney,
Queensland, Melbourne, University of New South Wales, Monash, Adelaide, the
Australian National University and Flinders) promote themselves as world-class
institutions whose degrees are manifestly superior in reputation than those awarded
by their less elite rivals.

During the last decade in Australia, one of the purposes of government-driven reforms
in sectors such as education has been to install or enhance relations of competition.
Higher education serves many purposes and houses many and contrasting forms
of subjectivity. The behaviours of people and institutions are not predestined to be
competitive, or, for that matter, ‘economic’. But in competition reform, the market
and competitive aspects of higher education are brought to the forefront. Competition
is seen both as an end that must always be striven for and as an ever-existing state of
affairs “human nature’). (Marginson 2000: 49)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION t 136 )

Marginson also argues that Australia essentially has a three-tiered university sys-
tem which is dominated by the eight elite universities named above, followed by the
four universities of technology and lastly the group of new (post-1987) universities
created by the merging of the old Colleges of Advanced Education. The funding
arrangements put in place have tended to strongly favour the elite universities because
they have the resources to supplement their income from sources other than the fed-
eral government (for example, real estate, donations and so on). Linked to this advan-
tage is the fact that education acts, in some ways, as a status good and such goods
(especially those from elite universities) are monopolised by those best able to com-
pete for them (graduates of elite private schools with high ATAR scores, for example).
Their graduates are further advantaged in the workforce as their degree carries
with it a reputational value that outstrips those from less prestigious universities
(Marginson 2000).

We can see from the above that while higher education clearly offers individuals
the means to secure better jobs than they could hope to be offered without a degree,
it is still the case that the sector is strongly affected by market principles, and by the
symbolic value which universities carry with them: elites with cultural capital attend
elite private schools and go to elite universities where they are prepared for an elite
profession. Of course there are exceptions to this pattern, but they are few.

lM THE NEW KNOWLEDGE ECONOMY LOS Consider the

: : , , , , changing nature of
As the title of this chapter suggests, we are moving into an era in which knowledge the economy and the

(as a commodity) is becoming increasingly important. This is because the ways in 01¢" knowledgeas a
commodity

which people work, the kinds of work that they do and the foundations of the econ-

omy itself have changed hugely in the past 50 years: we live in a knowledge-based

economy. As far back as 1996, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and

Development (OECD) argued that we were moving into a new era where knowledge

was the key new commodity:

The term ‘knowledge-based economy’ results from a fuller recognition of the role of
knowledge and technology in economic growth. Knowledge, as embodied in human
beings (as ‘human capital’) and in technology, has always been central to economic
development. But only over the last few years has its relative importance been
recognised, just as that importance is growing ... Knowledge-intensive service sectors,
such as education, communications and information, are growing even faster. Indeed,
it is estimated that more than 50 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the
major OECD economies is now knowledge-based. (OECD 1996: 9)

Lynch (2003) argues that an economy based on the production and distribution of
knowledge is not dissimilar to an economy based on any other commodity (such as
oil, beef or potatoes), in that it requires particular attributes of its workers (its ‘human
capital’). For an economy trading in information, these include:

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 130) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

m@ ‘know-who' as well as ‘know-how’; the quality and quantity of social connec-
tions a worker has becomes important in an economy reliant on relationships
and networks

m@ knowledge of, and competency with technologies such as microelectronics, com-
puters, robotics, telecommunications, new material developments, biotechnology,
and new forms of travel and transport

m@ a changed configuration of the family and of the home/work balance. When
fully ‘networked, an employee can work almost everywhere and at any time.
New patterns of employment emerge from these possibilities in terms of time
and space, but also in terms of full employment and underemployment (see
Chapters 8 and 10)

@ little need for those who are unskilled or underskilled, who cannot participate in a
workforce requiring high levels of skill. Linked to this is the expectation and need
for people to engage in regular professional development in order to update their
skills and expertise. Perhaps it will indeed be the case that the less you learn, the less
you will earn.

The last issue to discuss in this context is what is meant by ‘high-quality’ educa-
tion, which will equip Australians to work in the new, globalised economy (see
Chapter 13). There is little doubt that the education system must change in order to
meet the needs of a restructured economy, a rapidly changing labour market and the
exponential development of technology and of knowledges:

Globalised economies are typified by highly mobile populations seeking employment,
lifestyle and community. There are rapid flows of population within and across the
state and across national borders ... Traditional jobs are disappearing, new industries
and economies are coming on stream, and children are constructing their identities
primarily in relation to global consumer and media cultures. Parents and teachers are
dealing with students who bring new kinds of skills and knowledges, and are facing
serious issues about identity, family structures, poverty and social dislocation. (Luke
et al. 2000: 12)

Generally, it can be argued that education must be changed from a system based
on an industrial model to one that teaches students very different kinds of skills and
operational modes. In particular, what is required are the knowledges and skills to
engage with simultaneous combinations of print, oral, visual and multimediated
communications.

The ability to identify and solve problems flexibly and creatively, to collaborate
with others in groups, and to have good social and presentation skills will become
increasingly important, as will being able to deal with a variety of sources of
information (online resources, instruction manuals, receiving verbal help from
others, for example). In order to develop such skills, schools must not only teach
new curricula but deliver the material in new ways using a variety of media and

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION @®

text formats. Furthermore, young people will increasingly have to learn not only
to operate these modalities but to be confident with the wider cultural change
(such as new social and cultural identities, new knowledges and skills and the
breaching of older patterns of cultural diversity) that will follow their use (Luke
et al. 2000: 10).

Throughout this chapter it has been argued that an individual’s access to and par-
ticipation in education is inextricably entwined with his or her social background,
and this seems unlikely to change. The school one attends, and one’s family back-
ground, have an overarching influence on one’s educational attainment and, ulti-
mately, on one’s occupational and economic future. In an economy that is changing
quickly and dramatically, involving the loss of many jobs which, in the past, employed
large numbers of (often relatively unskilled) workers and the development of new
jobs requiring high levels of diverse literacies, those without such competencies will
be even more vulnerable. In this context, the concern about working-class boys’ levels
of literacy must surely become even greater.

Also of concern is the funding available to different schools and, consequently, the
bank of resources with which to enable students not simply to learn the old-fashioned
‘three Rs’ but to engage with the increasingly important combinations of print, oral,
visual and multimediated communications. Once again, it is likely that those who can
afford to go to schools with the equipment and expertise to teach these literacies will
be a good deal better off than those who cannot. In such an environment, social dis-
advantage is likely not to be reduced but to worsen.

* CONCLUSION

This chapter began with the suggestion that education is seen as both the cause of and answer to a
number of social problems. There has been an exploration of a number of ways of analysing the role
of education in an individual’s life, and in society at large. In particular, a person’s social background
has been seen as key not only to his or her educational attainment but to his or her life chances more
generally. Although historically education was viewed as a means of equalising social disadvantage, it
has been argued that it also plays a role in exacerbating it. As the funding arrangements for education
have been changed so that the private sector plays an increasingly important role in educational

provision and the public sector has become more impoverished, the demand for a much better skilled
workforce in the changing economy has meant the disadvantaged becoming more economically
vulnerable, rather than less. As we move into an era of unprecedented change, which brings with it the
fear of environmental collapse and the hope of new opportunities and sustainable prosperity, we should
be looking very carefully at the means of extending these opportunities to a// Australians, rather than
simply those who are already privileged.

e @ © © © @ @ © © @ © @ © © © @ 6 6 C6 6 6 CC 6 6 © 6 CC 6 6 6 6 6 @ © @ @ ee

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


N SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

1. It has been argued that universities may become seriously threatened by the expansion of
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) which are relatively cheap, open-access courses not
unlike a conventional university course yet often taught out of elite international universities.
For the most part, they are free until assessment and certification. Would you be interested in
undertaking such a course? Does attending a university bring added benefits to you which you
couldn't get online? (LO1)

2. Thinking back to the postcode where you grew up (rather than where you went to school), to

what extent do you agree with the assertion that your school achievements were linked to the

cultural capital level in your household? (LO2)

oe

Is there a case to be made that universities should be fully funded by the government rather
than by students or others? Or should we have a user-pays system? (LO3)

4. To what extent do you agree with the contention that a more educated populace leads to a
more cohesive democracy? Does this depend on what is taught? (LO4)

a

How accurate are the arguments that we need to have a much better-educated populace than
we currently have? Do you think everyone should be university-educated? (LO5)

Access Economics (2010) Study of Relative Funding Levels for University Teaching and Research Activities,
Access Economics.

Archer, L., Halsall, A. & Hollingworth, S. (2007) ‘Inner-City Femininities and Education: “Race”, Class, Gender and
Schooling in Young Women’s Lives’, Gender and Education, 19(5), pp. 549-68.

Arnot, M. & Mac an Ghaill, M. (eds) (2006) The Routledge Falmer Reader in Gender and Education, New York,
Routledge.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009) Education and Training Experience, Cat. No. 6278.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2014) Schools Australia, 2013, Cat. No. 4221.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Education International (2013) ‘Onshore Higher Education International Students as a Proportion of
All Onshore Students by University 2012’, <https://aei.gov.au/research/Research-Snapshots/Documents/
International%20students%20in%20Australian%20unis%202012.pdf>.

Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) (2011) Australia’s Welfare 2011, Cat. No. AUS 142, Canberra,
AIHW.

Ball, S. & Gewirtz, S. (1996) ‘Girls in the Education Market: Choice, Competition and Complexity’, Gender and

— — Education, 19(2), pp. 207-22.

Blaise, M. (2005) Playing It Straight: Uncovering Gender Discourses in the Early Childhood Classroom, New York,
Routledge.

Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

Bowles, S. & Gintis, H. (1976) Schooling in Capitalist America, London, Routledge Kegan Paul.

Bradley, D., Noonan, P., Nugent, H. & Scales, B. (2008) Review of Australian Higher Education, Final Report,
Canberra, Commonwealth Government.

Bromley, V.L. (2012) Feminisms Matter: Debates, Theories, Activism, Toronto, University of Toronto Press.

Brown, C. (2013) ‘ATARs—You May as Well Use Postcodes for University Admissions’, The Conversation,
<http://theconversation.com/atars-you-may-as-well-use-postcodes-for-university-admissions-19154>.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE G

Chesters, J., Ryan, C. & Sinning, M. (2013) The Return to Literacy Skills in Australia, National Centre for Vocational
Education Research, <http://www.ncver.edu.au/publications/2623.html>.

Connell, R.W. (2004) ‘Working Class Parents’ Views of Secondary Education’, International Journal of Inclusive
Education, 8(3), pp. 227-39.

Connell, R.W., Ashenden, D.J., Kessler, S. & Dowsett, G.W. (1982) Making the Difference: Schools, Families and
Social Division, Sydney, George Allen & Unwin.

Connelly, E. (2000) ‘Trinity Boys Tied Up and Raped, Court Told’, Sydney Morning Herald, 21 December.

Dalley-Trim, L. (2006) ‘Mentoring Masculinities: Race and Class in the (Re-)construction of Gender in the USA
and the UK’, Youth Studies Australia, 25(3), pp. 26-33.

Datnow, A. & Hubbard, L. (eds) (2002) Gender in Policy and Practice: Perspectives on Single-Sex and Coeducational
Schooling, New York, London, Routledge Falmer.

D’Cruz, J.V. & Langford, P. (eds) (1990) Issues in Australian Education, Melbourne, Longman Cheshire.

Francis, B. (2005) Reassessing Gender and Achievement: Questioning Contemporary Key Debates, London, New
York, Routledge.

Gronn, P. (2000) ‘From Lucky Country to Clever Country: Leadership, Schooling and the Formation of Australian
Elites’, in T. Seddon & L. Angus (eds), Beyond Nostalgia: Reshaping Australian Education, Melbourne, ACER
Press, pp. 70-91.

Haywood, C. & Mac an Ghaill, M. (2013) Education and Masculinity: Social, Cultural and Global Transformations,
London, Taylor and Francis.

Jackson, C. & Dempster, S. (2009) ‘I Sat Back on My Computer ... With a Bottle of Whisky Next to Me’:
Constructing “Cool” Masculinity through “Effortless” Achievement in Secondary and Higher Education’,
Journal of Gender Studies, 18(4), pp. 341-56.

Jaeger, M.M. (2010) Does Cultural Capital Really Affect Academic Achievement?, Center for Strategic Research
in Education, Aarhus University.

Landreau, J.C. & Rodriguez, N.M. (2012) Queer Masculinities: A Critical Reader in Education, London, Springer.

Leigh, A. & Ryan, C. (2008) ‘Estimating Returns to Education Using Different Natural Experiment Techniques’,
Economics of Education Review, 27, pp. 149-60.

Lingard, R., Martino, W. & Mills, M. (2009) Boys and Schooling: Beyond Structural Reform, Basingstoke, UK,
Palgrave Macmillan.

Luke, A., Matters, G. Herschell, P., Grace, N., Barrett, R. & Land, R. (2000) New Basics Project Technical Paper,
Brisbane, Education Queensland.

Lynch, D. (2003) ‘Education in a Knowledge Economy’, in B.A. Knight & A. Harrison (eds), Research Perspectives
on Education for the Future, Flaxton, Qld, Post Pressed, pp. 13-29.

Mac an Ghaill, M. & Haywood, C. (2007) Gender, Culture, and Society: Contemporary Femininities and
Masculinities, New York, Palgrave Macmillan.

Marginson, S. (2000) ‘Competition in Australian Higher Education since 1987: Intended and Unintended
Effects’, in T. Seddon & L. Angus (eds), Beyond Nostalgia: Reshaping Australian Education, Melbourne, ACER
Press, pp. 48-70.

Ministerial Council for Education, Early Childhood Development and Youth Affairs (MCEECDYA) (2008)
Melbourne Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians, <www.mceecdya.edu.au/verve/_
resources/national_declaration_on_the_educational_goals_for_young_australians.pdf>.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (1996) The Knowledge-Based Economy,
Paris, OECD.

Poynting, S. & Donaldson, M. (2005) ‘Snakes and Leaders: Hegemonic Masculinity in Ruling-Class Boys’
Boarding Schools’, Men and Masculinities, 7(4), pp. 325-46.

Spender, D. (1982) Invisible Women: The Schooling Scandal, London, Writers and Readers.

Spender, D. & Sarah, E. (1980) Learning To Lose: Sexism and Education, London, The Women’s Press.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Symes, C. & Preston, N. (1997) Schools and Classrooms: A Cultural Studies Analysis of Education, South
Melbourne, Longman.

Teese, R. (2013) Academic Success and Social Power: Examinations and Inequality, North Melbourne, Australian
Scholarly Publishing.

Thayer-Bacon, B.J. (ed.) (2013) Education Feminism: Classic and Contemporary Readings, Albany, State University
of New York.

Walker, F. (2003) ‘Trinity Settles out of Court with Bullying Victim’, The Sun-Herald, 9 February.

Walker, J. (1988) Louts and Legends, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Western, M. (2000) ‘Competition, Education and Class Formation’, in T. Seddon & L. Angus (eds), Beyond
Nostalgia: Reshaping Australian Education, Melbourne, ACER Press, pp. 91-104.

Willis, P. (1977) Learning To Labour, Aldershot, UK, Gower.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7

LNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT
OF WELLBEING

APTER OUTLINE

® This chapter begins with a discussion that centres on what we mean when we speak of
‘health’ in the 21st century and examines some of the ways in which the health profile of
Australians has changed over the past century.

® This is followed by an analysis and critique of biomedicine, which focuses on the ways
in which it conceives of the body, and on the body’s relationship with the environment
around it.

& Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is discussed in terms of its challenge to the
philosophy and practice of biomedicine.

& Michel Foucault's notion of ‘the clinical gaze’ is used to explore ways of theorising the role
of medicine and the medical profession itself in contemporary Australia. In particular,
medicalisation is used to illustrate the clinical gaze being applied to individual bodies and
understandings of health.

® Finally, the chapter deals with the inequalities in health status in contemporary Australia. It
looks at ‘lifestyle, the ability to afford quality medical care and exposure to environmental
hazards as some of the key health indicators.

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Analyse and problematise the conception of
‘health’

LO2 Track the development of the biomedical
model and the approaches to health which
challenge it

LO3 Describe the medicalisation process

LO4 Locate illness and health within social
parameters

© Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO1 Analyse and
problematise the

All cultures have systems of medicine and regimes of bodily training. In the modern
era, the body and its physiological processes have been much more deeply invaded
than ever before.

(Giddens 1996: 32-3)

Health is both an individual and a social concern. This is immediately clear when

looking at the coverage given to it in newspapers, magazines, the internet and even on
television, where “‘docudramas’, makeover shows, dramas set in hospitals and medical
‘infotainment’ shows are ubiquitous.

This chapter examines the ways in which the medical industry can be seen to play
a role in social control. It also explores some of the issues that influence our under-
standings about health, the medical industry, and the people who staff it and run it.
Some of the explanations available for the differences in health enjoyed by men and
women, and the rich and the poor, are discussed. But first there are some basic ques-
tions to answer.

Mi WHAT IS ‘HEALTH’?

conception of ‘health’ The obvious answer to this question is that to be healthy is not to be ill. It means

having no chronic or acute illnesses, . y, ela
skin and eyes. It means being able and being able to partici-

In Australia, there is the potential for people to live very healthy lives—
although not all of us do. Like people in most industrialised nations, we have
clean water readily available to us. Our food supply is relatively reliable and

EUS VS") Life expectancy at birth in Australia, 1910-2010

90

35 | | Females
— Males

80 =

ie

705

65 5

Years

60 =

55 5

50 5

45 -

40 | ] | TT Td I y tf yyy

TTT | ]
S ok © A A© oD ok © 2 DO VY ok © Do O Vo O_O .0
WP O_O” O* LV LO” DD” BD? D>” D™ D> DD _ OX OD OO?
ROCCO MC CCC CC CCM SS SSS

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2011) Deaths, Australia, Cat. No. 3302.0, Canberra. © Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING @®

TUS 7/54) Life expectancy of a male or a female born between 2005 and 2007

90

HB Indigenous
IB Non-Indigenous

80 4

10>

60 4

504

Years

40 4

30 +

204

WS

0-

Male Female

Source: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) (2013) ‘Life Expectancy’, <http://www.aihw.gov.au/life-expectancy>.
Reproduced under Creative Commons (CC) BY 3.0 licence.

abundant. Most of us, especially those who live in cities, have sanitation systems
that remove sewage. We are immunised against many diseases which in the past

used to kill people in their thousands—measles, polio, rubella, even the flu (see
In Focus 7.1). As a result of these factors, life expectancies have increased
dramatically over the past 100 years(see Figure 7.1), although the rates differ for
non-Indigenous and Indigenous Australians whose life expectancies resemble
those of the developing world, as shown in Figures 7.2 and 7.3.

Death rates between 2007 and 2011 in selected states and territories—
Fricure 7.3) NSW, QLD, SA, WA, NT

5600
5200 5 | Indigenous

4400 4
4000 +
3600 -
3200 -
2800 +
2400 -
2000 -

1600 5
1200 4

_ L L
400 +
0 ee ae |

0 1-4 5-14 15-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-64 65 and
over

Deaths per 100 000 population

Age

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2011) Deaths, Australia, Cat. No. 3302.0, Canberra. © Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Figure 7.2 illustrates the differences in life expectancies of Indigenous and non-
Indigenous Australians born between 2005 and 2007. They remain very different.

Figure 7.3 offers a current snapshot of the ages at which people die in different
regions of Australia. How might we account for the large discrepancy?

It is possible for (non-Indigenous) Australians to have a health status that is far
better, and to live longer, than people living in South Africa, Asia, the Middle East,
South America and parts of Eastern Europe.

We might compare this potential for health with that of the past. A hundred years
ago most people lived in a state of constant pain of one kind or another: toothache,
infections, broken limbs and puerperal fever (among others) were a feature of every-
day life. This was in part due to the lack of analgesics, antiseptics and antibiotics, but
also because in Australia people’s everyday lives were

today. Physical labour was the norm, and the injuries and accidents resulting from
this were commonplace.

In addition to these minor afflictions were the epidemics that dominated the
urban landscape of the 18th and 19th centuries—dysentery, scurvy, typhus, smallpox,
cholera, tuberculosis (White 2009). These were infectious diseases, spread relatively
easily where living conditions were cramped and unhygienic. White children and
Indigenous Australians, who had not previously encountered these diseases, were
especially vulnerable and died in huge numbers (Carson 2007). In response to this,
the 19th century saw the development of better sanitation—the removal of sewage
and the provision of clean water, greater control over the processing and conditions
of sale of food, and the removal of abattoirs from urban slums—which largely put an
end to these deadly diseases, among the white population at least (White 2009). In
other words, the better health of the population was less a result of the growth of
the medical profession generally, and biomedicine in particular, than the result of
these relatively simple changes to the ways human waste, and germs, were under-
stood and controlled.

White (2004) goes further than this to argue that the rise of the medical profession

was largely irrelevant to the rise in health and that social reforms played the lead role

One hundred years ago the population had much shorter life expectancies. This
was linked, of course, to the fact that many people died prematurely from accidents
and disease. The patterns of disease and illness have shifted considerably over the past
century; the shift has largely been from people having health crises to having chronic
illnesses. Whereas in the past most people died from incurable diseases, in accidents
or during childbirth, today our population suffers from what might be described
as an epidemic of s. Diabetes, dementia, asthma, depression, aller-
gies, anxiety, hypertension, arthritis, osteoporosis, hepatitis A, B and C, HIV/AIDS,

coeliac disease, chronic fatigue syndrome and even some cancers are all examples of
ee illnesses that e

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING @®

i WAYS OF DEFINING AND MANAGING ILLNESS AND HEALTH LO2 Track the

development of the
biomedical model

All dis-ease comes from a state of unforgiveness. Whenever we are ill, we need to and the approaches
ons : to health which
search our hearts to see who it is we need to forgive. (Hay 1999: 22) challenge it

There are a number of competing and complementary ways of defining and managing
illness, and of producing health. Foremost among these is biomedicine. The term

‘biomedicine’ is shorthand for S biomedicine
. The development of this medical system was Mecrthodoxmodelof
medicine in Western industrial

the result of a belief system that emerged in the 19th century that prized science as a societies, which deals with the
: : +s body as if it operated

means of understanding and treating the body, rather than religious systems of ,, dependently of socal and

thought. Medical treatment came to replace the folk remedies that had previously been _ «uttura factors. Doctors ae

: sos : : : viewed as scientifically trained
used to cure illness. However, as we shall see, medicine is not without its challengers. gsrerts whose job it io

diagnose and treat illness in an

Biomedicine impartial and objective manner.

The first key feature of biomedicine is its powerful belief in scientific rationality. It is

founded on the idea that the problems of humanity can, and LS
. Built into this viewpoint is

of progress—
increasingly improving itself, and conquering nature, through science. This notion
came to replace those that had preceded it as an explanation for matters to do with
illness and death—religious, magical and various lay understandings of diseases and
their treatment, which still dominate in some parts of the world (Nattrass 2012).
This is not to say that ‘unscientific’ beliefs about health do not still exist, even in
developed countries. A simple example of this is provided by Helman (2000), who
reports a series of beliefs about ‘colds’, ‘chills’ and ‘fevers’ from London. Overall,
many Londoners believe that one gets a cold from ‘the penetration of the natural
environment (particularly areas of cold and damp) across the boundary of skin and
into the human body’ (2000: 97). This might involve going out when it is raining, sit-
ting on a cold bench, washing your hair when you don’t feel well, walking barefoot on
a cold floor or not wearing enough clothes. All these activities might cause an indi-
vidual to ‘catch cold’. Of course, a rational medical response to such beliefs is that
they are simply irrational and incorrect: ‘colds’ are viruses. They are upper respiratory
tract infections, having nothing at all to do with environmental temperature.

The second key feature of biomedicine is its emphasis on objective, numerical
"measurement and the physicochemical data that arise from this. Medical technology is

becoming increasingly comprehensive in the bodily functions it can measure, and
more accurate in its measurements. It is possible, for example, to observe a foetus at
any stage of its development and to measure its limbs and organs, its waste matter and
the chemical composition of the amniotic fluid that surrounds it. Decisions about the
treatment of the baby—even whether it will be terminated, given medical advice—

will be based on the data that are collated after an ultrasound scan, chorionic villus

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

sampling, amniocentesis or X-ray. Similarly, almost every time an adult visits a GP (for
whatever reason), data about that patient will be recorded—blood pressure, weight,
cholesterol level, blood sugar level, heart rate, Body Mass Index (BMI), and so on are
routinely collected. The purpose of the collection is to

determined by the medical profession. If the patient’s data are above the recommended
levels, the GP will start to treat the patient. When such data collection is commonplace,
patients may well go to the GP for one ailment and emerge from the doctor’s surgery
with another. This is because the definition of illness is the prerogative of the doctor.

In short, (and their increasing use) has fundamentally altered
. Not only do data produce evidence of

sometimes hidden dysfunction, but they have
patients and doctors. The patient’s perspective might differ greatly from that of the doc-

tor, and (in terms of the doctor’s interest in

the patient’s understanding of his or her own body) is determined by their respective
Ee SRT. (Wills et al. 2006). A privately educated Anglo-Australian

doctor who went to an elite university is much more likely to listen to the views of a
patient with a similar background, than to the views of a patient who is, say, an elderly
working-class Aboriginal woman (no matter what her educational level). This power

differential is one of the key reasons why people turn to alternative —— ath

‘those treating them (Twohig 2009).

The third key feature of biomedicine is its view of disease and illness itself. This view
is made clear by the use of language to describe illness, which is the language of milita-
rism (Lupton 2006: 65): the ‘aggressive’ cancer, the ‘fight’ against AIDS, the ‘war’ against
malaria, the ‘battle’ against diabetes, an ‘invasive’ infection. Biomedicine sees illnesses
as invading armies, which will conquer the body unless they are destroyed. And it is the
role of the doctor to find the en ici roying. Illnesses are
conceived of as

Similarly, the human body itself is viewed as being composed of related but sepa-
rate parts. In transplant surgery, for example, the body is viewed rather as we
machine: if a part is faulty, replace it. In this context, hospitals become rather like
repair shops, where worn-out, faulty or broken-down parts are removed and replaced.
Other medical systems—for example, traditional Chinese medicine—believe the
exact opposite: they see the body as a collection of intimately linked systems. You
cannot change one without affecting the others, and good health is achieved through
the balancing of these systems.

The final feature of modern medicine to be discussed here is related to this linkage
of the medical and the social: that is, there is an overwhelming concentration in mod-
ern medicine on the diagnosis and treatment of individual patients. Yet it is becoming
clearer in contemporary societies that a large proportion of modern illnesses and
diseases . The term ‘environment’ refers
not only to the quality of the food available to eat, the air we breathe, the amount of

ultraviolet radiation around us, and so on, but also to the social situation in which we

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING @®

live. There is no doubt, for example, that the rich have longer and healthier lives than
the poor (Walraven 2012).

The cause of this difference is social, rather than biological: the rich have access to elite
for hospital surgery; they are exposed to far less environmental pollution in their homes

... there is little evidence that social structures of class and gender, of ethnicity and of

inequality have stopped shaping people’s lives. Industrial capitalism may have changed
its appearance, patriarchy may no longer be the bulwark of women’s oppression, but
they both still structure health and illness, and distribute disease unequally through the
population. In the area of health and illness, individuals have not been freed from the
structures of patterned inequality, nor have their choices increased. In fact, society has
become more unequal, and the poor sicker. (White 2009: 6)

Later in this chapter we will explore some of the ways in which social inequality is
replicated in the health and wellbeing of Australians. Meanwhile, let us look at a
major challenge to the power of biomedicine and its view of both people and the
environment in which they find themselves.

DO WE WANT ‘COMMUNITY IMMUNITY’?
Australia’s immunisation program began in 1924 and since then it has been one of the most
successful major public health innovations, saving many thousands of lives. Immunisation
protects a person against an illness or disease through the infection of micro-organisms. The
vaccine stimulates the person’s immune system and to build resistance to the disease. This

resistance primes the body to detect and destroy future infections quickly and effectively. Vaccines

ncnon = =

contain antigens, which cause the immune system to produce a specific immune response and
adjuvants which boost the body’s own immune response.
The Australian government currently recommends that children are vaccinated against the

following diseases:

Rotavirus

Diphtheria

Tetanus

Whooping cough

Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib)
Hepatitis B

Polio

Pneumococcal disease

Hepatitis A

Meningococcal disease

Chickenpox

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Human papillomavirus (HPV)

Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR).

Despite the success of the immunisation program in terms of eradicating some diseases
(smallpox, for example) and significantly reducing the occurrence of others (measles, mumps and
rubella, for example), there is widespread community suspicion about the safety of vaccination—
despite the evidence of its safety and success. Largent (2012: 2), for example, argues that 40 per
cent of American children are unvaccinated. In 2014, 92 per cent of Australian five year olds were
fully immunised (see Medicare 2014).

At issue here is community immunity—according to the World Health Organization, 93-95
per cent of any population needs immunisation to prevent a measles outbreak. The US Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention recommends a 100 per cent immunisation rate for whooping
cough, which is potentially deadly with each infected person capable of infecting 12-15 others
(see Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2013). In some parts of Australia, there is
concern that immunisation rates are too low to prevent a major epidemic (you can find the rates

for your area at <www.nhpa.gov.au>).

Controversy
In 1998, Andrew Wakefield published an article in The Lancet which linked MMR vaccinations

with autism and he called for their suspension. This led to an increasing lack of trust in the
vaccination. The paper was later withdrawn by The Lancet which argued that Dr Wakefield’s
research was ‘fatally flawed’. The UK General Medical Council charged Wakefield with serious
professional misconduct, including dishonesty, and he was deregistered.

Yet, interestingly, there are still many people who believe in a connection between MMR
vaccinations and autism, and this belief has undermined the federal government’s campaign
to raise immunisation rates to a level recommended by the World Health Organization. Despite
strong evidence to the contrary, those against immunisation raise the following concerns (see

Department of Health and Ageing 2013), among others:

Vaccines cause autism

Diseases have disappeared so vaccines are no longer necessary
Vaccines contain toxins

Vaccines are unsafe and cause side effects

™ Vaccines weaken the immune system.

There are a number of anti-vaccination campaigners active in Australia who appear in
the media mounting arguments similar to those above. The Australian Vaccination Network
is the foremost example of such an organisation (you can view the organisation’s position at
<http://avn.org.au>). There are, of course, those who actively contest such beliefs—you can

find an example at <http://meryldorey.org>.

Q: What do you think are the factors which drive individuals’ beliefs about immunisation?
Does the internet play a role in raising anxiety levels or is it the best source of a range of
opinions by experts?

Q: Do you think immunisation should be compulsory? Should children’s enrolment at

school be contingent on them being fully immunised? Why or why not?

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING @®

Complementary and alternative medicine

Biomedicine is not only a set of health practices—it is a set of beliefs about health.

Easthope (2004) argues that biomedicine is losing its appeal and an unstoppable
revolution is emerging in the ways in which we approach our health. He cites three
causes of this. The first is the increasing emphasis on consumption, rather than pro-
duction, as the key characteristic of the postmodern economy. The second is the
growth of an and
The third is the declining

corporations (2004: 318-19).

Focusing on the first of Easthope’s contentions, it is clear that there is an increas-
ing belief in the perspicacity of consumer choice—the idea that there are a number of
competing service providers from whom consumers may choose the most appropriate
for them. The corollary of this is a sense of relativism, where the historical authority
of the medical and pharmaceutical industries is challenged and becomes simply one of
many explanations for a medical condition. In this context, consumers pursue the
treatment they believe in and it appears that more people are following complementary
and alternative medicine (CAM).

So, why do people go to CAM practitioners? Hawks and Moyad (2003: 223) suggest
the following reasons:

desire for control over decision making

hope to gain therapeutic benefit

desire to avoid toxicities, invasiveness or other qualities of conventional treatments
need to control undesirable side effects of conventional medicine

preference for natural over synthetic medications

dissatisfaction with attitudes and practitioners of conventional medicine

failure of diagnosis

failure of conventional therapy

chronic illnesses with poor prognosis

acute or chronic conditions for which conventional treatments are lacking or
disappointing

healing system that is part of a client's cultural or identity-group heritage

reduced insurance coverage

restraints on access to health care

increased costs of prescriptions and services

increased interest in preventive strategies and wholistic approaches to health, such
as eating a more nutritionally sound diet, maintaining fitness and reducing stress.

Twohig (2009) argues that aside from the growth in individualism and interest
in health promotion (or the state of ‘wellness’), it may well be that the interest in
nce individuals can

-self-diagnose, get an online prescription and medication, research illnesses and their

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

alternative therapies
A large group of therapies that
have a fundamentally different
approach to the body from that
of biomedicine. Using a variety
of diagnostic, preventive and
curative techniques that view
patients as being in control of
their own healing, alternative
therapies use ‘natural’ medicines,
rather than those produced by
multinational pharmaceutical
companies, to treat illness.

Australian Medical
Association (AMA)
The professional association

of the medical profession,
which has control over who is
permitted to practise medicine,
and which investigates
malpractice complaints against
doctors. It is an extremely
powerful lobby group.

CAM therapies
Alternative medical systems Alternative medical systems are built on complete systems of theory and
practice. Homeopathic and naturopathic medicine are examples that have
developed in Western cultures. Examples of systems that have developed in
non-Western cultures include traditional Chinese medicine and Ayurveda.

Mind-body interventions Mind-body medicine uses a variety of techniques designed to enhance the
mind's capacity to affect bodily function and symptoms. Some techniques
that were considered CAM in the past have become mainstream (e.g. patient
). Other mind-body

techniques are still considered CAM, including meditation, prayer, mental

support groups and

healing and therapies that use creative outlets such as art, music or dance.

Biologically based therapies Biologically based therapies in CAM use substances found in nature, such as
herbs, foods and vitamins. Some examples are dietary supplements, herbal
products, and the use of ‘natural’ but scientifically unproven therapies such

as shark cartilage to treat cancer.

Manipulative and body-based Manipulative and body-based methods in CAM are based on manipulation

methods and/or movement of one or more parts of the body. Some examples are
chiropractic or osteopathic manipulation and massage.
Energy therapies Energy therapies involve the use of energy fields. Biofield therapies are intended

to affect energy fields that purportedly surround and penetrate the human body.
The existence of such fields has not yet been scientifically proven. Examples
include qi gong, Reiki, and therapeutic touch. Bioelectromagnetic-based
therapies involve the unconventional use of electromagnetic fields such as
pulsed fields, magnetic fields, or alternating current or direct current fields.

Source: Hawks, J.H. & Moyad, M.A. (2003) ‘CAM: Definition and Classification Overview’,
Urologic Nursing, 23(3), pp. 221-4.

7.1

treatments, and get easy access to information about CAM therapies (see Table 7.1).

Similarly, Coulter and Willis (2004) argue that their appeal is heightened by the
and the desire to treat the body as naturally as

possible. (wherever feasible)
ventional medicin

€.

Alternative therapies can be used at any stage of health and illness. This is to say,
they are designed to promote health as much as they are a means of curing ill health.
Although there are numerous kinds of natural therapies, they share a number of

hilosophical standpoints about the body: that disease indicates a lack of balance in
the body, o alack of balance between the person and the outside word: that the body

and that finding out the patients’ view of their own illness (and what they think might

be done about it) is a crucial step in the recovery process.

The Australian Medical Association (AMA) is relatively hostile to CAM thera-
pists, arguably because these are increasingly encroaching on the client base of con-
ventional medicine. Historically, the medical profession has always worked to
maintain its professional control by organising against other practitioners who might
encroach into their domain—midwives and optometrists (who cannot treat diseases

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING @®

of the eye) are examples of professions that have struggled unsuccessfully to have
their expertise recognised and respected within the field (White 2009). Interestingly,
although there might be a convincing economic argument to be made, the medical
profession exhibits a ‘will to truth’ (Foucault 1984) that is being resisted by its cus-
tomers, who increasingly value their own experiences and beliefs as having explana-
tory power: ‘For users of CAM neither the criteria for defining health and illness nor
those for defining valid knowledge about these matters are ceded entirely to licensed
professionals’ (O’Connor 2002: 62).

The most commonly used argument by the AMA to justify CAM therapies not
being available on Medicare (although some therapies are now claimable on some

health insurance policies) is that there is no evidence that such therapies work. (See

Hrobjartsson & Brorson 2002 for a wide-ranging discussion of randomised trials.) It

(See Shang et al. 2005 for an

analysis of homeopathy, for example.) Yet it still appears likely—given that in our
ageing population chronic illness will become a key health concern—that alternative
therapies will continue to grow in popularity. Such expansion is also linked to dis-
courses which promote the ‘regulation of the well. What we eat, drink and smoke,
who we sleep with, how we relate to family members and friends, and the demands of
working life, have all become subjects of professional advice in the pursuit of that
elusive endpoint: “wellbeing” (Wainwright 2008: 2).
In addition, if alternative therapies are a response to the perceived faults of con-
ventional medicine and indicate a change in people’s value systems and those of con-
temporary culture, then the use of CAM is likely to expand (see Table 7.2).
Whether it has the potential to seriously threaten conventional medicine’s grip on treanae3
the way we view the aetiology of disease is debatable, however, despite clear concern particular disease.

Comparison of CAM and biomedical approaches to illness and disease

CAM BIOMEDICINE

Health is a balance of opposing forces within the body. Health is the absence of disease.

Disease is understood as indicating the presence of Disease is defined in relation to a specific part of
negative, disruptive forces within the body. the body.

Symptoms are the product of the body’s attempts to rid Essentially, disease is understood as a deviation of
itself of toxic substances. normal functioning.

Diagnosis is achieved by ‘reading’ the body, and Diagnosis is achieved by examining the form and
examining dietary habits, lifestyle and constitution type. structure of specific organisms and the degree to

which the presence of a disease indicates a deviation
from normal functioning.

Therapy is based on an attempt to strengthen vitalising, Therapy consists of attempts to destroy or
positive forces within the body. suppress disease.
ARB Source: Aakster, C.W. (1992) ‘Concepts in Alternative Medicine’, in A. Beattie, M. Gott, L. Jones & M. Sidell (eds),

Health and Well-being: A Reader, London, Macmillan pp. 88-91. Reproduced with permission of Palgrave Macmillan.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

from the AMA that it might. It is more likely, in the long term, that alternative medi-
cine will continue

ensure that it remains marginal. Alternativel

pening in the United States and United Kingdom, where what is called ‘integrative’
(US) and ‘integrated’ (UK) medicine, combining mainstream and alternative thera-
pies, is becoming relatively commonplace (Coulter & Willis 2004).

THE CLINICAL GAZE

Here we explore ways of theorising the role of medicine in contemporary Australia
using the work of the French post-structuralist Michel Foucault, who argued that
populations are increasingly coming under the scrutiny of what he calls ‘the clinical
gaze’,

This gaze falls on two separate, but linked, ‘bodies’—bodies of population and
oe. Bodies of population are measured and trey 9
, and individual people are exhorted to engage in health regimens in which
d. The sig-
nificance of the measurements and are two key concerns

here. Foucault argues that , in particular, as a source of

There are numerous health measures that populations are encouraged by the
medical profession to undertake: eat less fat, eat less sugar, eat less red meat, eat
more wholegrains, eat five serves of fruit and vegetables each day and exercise at
least three times per week, do not smoke, drink less alcohol, drink less caffeine, drink
more water, test your blood sugar levels and blood pressure, have regular checks of
your breasts, cervix, prostate, bone density, cholesterol, and so on. A judgement

efficacy about the efficacy of doing any of these things is not being made here. But there is

A medical term relating to no doubt that you
the usefulness of a particular

treatment, drug or practice in The second key issue for Michel Foucault is the power of the institution that

dealing with a particular iliness dominates medical discourse—the medical profession itself. Clearly, it is in a position
. These terms are

in inverted commas because they are not clearly delineated states of being. In addi-
tion, like any other industry with a profit motive, the medical profession is engaged
in a constant battle to expand its client base (that is, find new patients) and to treat

Lo3 Describethe Medicalisation

medicalisation process

Medicalisation is perhaps the clearest example of Foucault’s ‘clinical gaze’. The term
refers to the process of redefining normal human bodily experiences as medical

problems. In other words, physical experiences that were historically seen as

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING t 166 )

unproblematic suddenly become, through the intervention of the medical profes-
sion and a renaming of the experience, a problem. As a consequence of this process,
the intervention of the medical profession is now required.

Medicalisation has two interrelated processes. First, certain behaviours or
ee is, they are defined in terms of

‘illness and health. This is a process historically directed at women far more than
at men. The reason for this disparity is that women’s bodies are viewed as inher-
ently problematic—even dangerous—within patriarchal culture, and, perhaps
unconsciously, the medical profession is interested in regulating and controlling
the female body. The regulation of childbirth is perhaps the most obvious example.
Whereas in the past childbirth was viewed as an everyday experience for adult
women that would be dealt with at home with the assistance of a midwife (this is

the norm for all countries that are not industrialised), today pregnancy and
childbirth both are seen as cause for Cn
“te obstetricians and) ultimately, giving birth in hospital often with a high degree
. It was this that led to the establishment of birthing

centres, which sought to ‘de-medicalise’ pregnancy and birth for women. Yet,
Australia’s rate for caesarean sections is up to 31.6 per cent—more than double
that recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) (Li 2012).

The second process inherent in medicalisation is the redefinition of particular
experiences, or ways of being, as deviant. Following this, medical practice becomes a

vehicle for the elimination or the control of the ‘problem’. The campaign against
overweight or obesity is an example here: we are strongly encouraged to match our
weight against a set of criteria (body mass index or percentage of fat, for example)
which tells us whether we are underweight, normal weight, overweight or obese. Once
categorised, the patient (who may well be healthy) is encouraged to lose weight
through exercise and diet, and warned of the risk factors involved in being above or
below normal weight. Gilman (2008) argues that contemporary society’s attitude
towards overweight is akin to a

. Yet there is a direct correlation
between obesity and social class (Porwal & Verma 2013): the poor have a far higher
rate than the rich, they eat more fast food, have a diet higher in fat, eat fewer fruits
and vegetables, and participate less in physical activity (Singh & Singh 2008). They are
more concerned about the cost of food (and therefore buy more ‘convenience’ and
‘fast’ foods), eat more traditional food than the rich, are more ‘permissive’ in their
eating habits and pay less attention to the health messages disseminated by health
authorities (Hupkens et al. 2000). It is clear from this that obesity is much more than

Ss
culture and resource level,

The process of medicalisation occurs at a number of levels. First, medical language
is used to define a problem. The terms ‘syndrome’ and ‘disorder’ are commonly

used in this context. Once named, the process can begin. Institutions, medical staff,

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

pharmaceutical companies, and articles about research into the syndrome or disor-
der in reputable medical journals
with the new problem. Finally, and inevitably, comes the patient-doctor interaction,
when diagnosis is confirmed and treatment can begin in earnest.
Historically, there has been an expansion of the spheres coming under the clinical

gaze. A number of activities such as alcoholism, drug addiction, gambling addiction
and smoking, which were once seen as‘bac’ are now seen asa medical problem, Even

issues to do with sexuality, the behaviour of children or short-term memory problems
can come under the scrutiny of the medical profession. This is not to say that they are
‘curable’ problems, and the consultin

STRESSOMANIA?
‘Stress’ is possibly one of the most prevalent and dangerous health issues—in developed
countries at least (Cohen et al. 2007). It is commonly understood to be a psychological response
to external risk which, in turn, generates physical responses including: blood pressure rises,
more rapid breathing, slowing of the digestive system, increased heart rate, depression of
the immune system, muscle tension and a heightened state of alertness which can lead to
sleeplessness (see Bickerstaff 2007).

Prolonged exposure to such a sense of risk (or threat) can lead to a wide range of coronary
and neurological diseases and these are very well known, as are a wide range of associated
illnesses Jones 2001). Reducing ‘stress’ (however it is defined) thus becomes a major
preoccupation of health regimes—but particularly for CAM since stress is self-diagnosed for the
most part, ill-defined as either a cause or effect of illness and even perceived as an illness itself
(see Foss & Dyrstad 2011).

Yet of interest here is the response by treatment regimes to the epidemic of stress evident in
contemporary societies. In particular, how is it defined and discussed by CAM practitioners?

Hay’s book You Can Heal Your Life, for example, contains a blend of therapeutic material and
lifestyle advice for individuals suffering from stress generally and who (more specifically) believe
that their ‘body doesn’t work’ (Hay 1999: 27), nor their relationships, finances or life. Her overall
contention is that all disease (or ‘dis-ease’, as she names it) originates from one’s emotional state,
particularly feelings of ‘unforgiveness’ (Hay 1999: 22) or grievance. Indeed, she suggests that
whenever one becomes ill, it is necessary to decide who we need to forgive and the illness will

resolve itself. Hay also asserts that disease has no biological origins but, instead, emotional ones:

| believe we create every so-called illness in our body. The body, like everything else in life, is a
mirror of our inner thoughts and beliefs. The body is always talking to us, if we will only take the
time to listen. Every cell within your body responds to every single thought you think and every
word you say. (Hay 1999: 151)

More specifically, it is argued in this book that burns, for example, originate from anger,
cancer from resentment and so forth. Hay provides an exhaustive list of illnesses and their

emotional origins. One example is her explanation of amoebic dysentery which she contends

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e

ncnon = =


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING t 166 )

is caused by ‘Believing they are out to get you’ and suggests a new thought pattern: / am
the power and authority in my world. |am at peace (Hay 1999: 90). Hay exhorts her readers to

resolve their generative emotions to heal themselves in the following way (Hay 1999: 175):

1. Look up the mental cause. See if it could be true for you. If not, sit quietly and ask yourself,
‘What could be the thoughts in me that created this?’.

2. Repeat to yourself, ‘lam willing to release the pattern in my consciousness that has created
this condition’.

3. Repeat the new thought pattern to yourself several times.

4. Assume that you are already in the process of healing.

Q: To what extent do you think Hay is right, that illness is primarily caused by emotions?
Is it possible to cure illness using meditation or emotion management? Or do you think

Hay’s philosophy is dangerously anti-scientific? Where do you stand?

Medicalisation is a useful concept, because it emphasises the fact that medicine is a
social enterprise and not just a scientific one. Indeed, a biological basis is neither nec-

essary nor sufficient for an experience to be defined in terms of illness.
structed through human action: it is not inherent in any behaviour or condition but is
conferred by others. Thus, medical diagnosis is an interpretive process through which
illness is constructed, and our sense of what constitutes an illness is always in flux.

Aside from the scrutiny of individuals by the medical profession, Foucault also
argued that populations en masse were examined. Epidemiology—the study of and __ epidemiology
collection of data about disease by government agencies—attempts to match class, sha ofthe ditaton
tO ofillness through a population.
. Epidemiology plots the range and the itelhoodafcqeang
distribution of disease among the population. Through such statistics, individuals are _ anitiness.
. It might be argued
that, as a population, it is useful to have such data because they can alert us to inequal-
ities in the provision of health care, and to the levels of health and wellbeing among
specific groups in the community.

Epidemiology has made a significant contribution to the general surveillance of
health not only by medical staff, but by people themselves, and has extended the

clinical gaze even further.

i THE DISTRIBUTION OF HEALTH AND ILLNESS LO4 Locate illness and

TE health within social
There are a number of different means of measuring an individual’s social position. _ parameters

It can be done through occupational class (whether the individual is a stockbroker
or a garbage collector, for example) or through the ownership of major assets, such
as shares, houses or cars. But such a measure can omit members of a community
who are not working—for example, women undertaking unpaid work at home,

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t isc ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

health promotion

A number of strategies
designed to reduce the general
population undertaking health
risks. At a policy level, health
promotion seeks to prevent
illness rather than treat it, and
focuses on an individual’s
responsibility to manage his or
her own exposure to risk.

children or retired people. Thus the Australian Bureau of Statistics developed from
the census data its Socio-Economic Index for Areas (SEIFA), which relies on a range
of economic indicators to determine a person’s social position. But however one
decides to determine a person’s socioeconomic position, a similar picture emerges.

, report being in only fair or
poor health, and have much higher death rates than those at the top of the social
scale. This is the case at every stage of life, from birth through to adulthood and old
age. We now examine why this is so.

There is no doubt that there are a number of causes of the disparity in health and
wellbeing among those in different socioeconomic groups. It is extremely difficult to
delineate each single factor in this complex relationship between factors, some of
which exacerbate others. Furthermore, it is impossible to ignore the impact of ethnic-
ity and gender, and their intersections, in determining the health choices individuals
make and the choices that are made for them by wider social structures. Overall, there

are three groups of pertinent factors—lifestyle factors, the environmental dangers
that those in lower socioeconomic groups are exposed to, and the ability to afford

Lifestyle factors

One of the most powerful discourses about health in recent years has been that on
. Campaigns have been instituted by successive governments to

educate people both about the risks of doing some things and

doing others. (The QUIT campaign is perhaps the most comprehensive and best-
known example of such an endeavour.) The dangers of smoking, drinking and being
overweight are expounded, and the benefits of a diet based around fruits, vegetables
and grains and which is low in sugar and fat are extolled. We are encouraged to exer-
cise and to use sunscreen, and to have specific tests done at various stages of our lives
for such things as bowel, breast and cervical cancer. These are messages propounded
to entire populations, as Foucault described, and there is no doubt, judging from the
epidemiological evidence available, that the aetiology of disease can be largely traced
to lifestyle. In other words, if you are obese, drink and smoke heavily, take no exercise,
eat a diet rich in fat and sugar, sit in the sun all day without protection, do not have
safe sex and share intravenous needles, you are likely to be less healthy, and to die at
an earlier age, than if you did not.

Having stated the obvious, what is missing from the crudely biological is the social.
Health authorities argue that the main disease groups contributing to the ‘burden of
disease’ in modern societies are cardiovascular disease, cancer, mental disorders,
neurological disorders, chronic respiratory conditions and injuries (Begg et al. 2007).

All of the above are, to a greater or lesser extent rs—what
one consumes, where one works and the strength of one’s social support. Given the
exposure of entire populations to health promotion messages, why is it that particular
groups of people have a higher rate of ‘uptake’ than others?

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING t 166 )

culture in which one is embedded—working-class men, for example, are the most

ed Furthermore, this culture encourages working-

as
ity (Wainwright 2008). The middle class, on the other hand, are much more likely to
show illness and to seek treatment (Burgess 2008). But first let us look at the three
cornerstones of health promotion: diet, exercise and health risks.

The links between diet and health are unavoidable, and have been a cause for
concern for over a century. Most of the major killers of Australians today (cardio-
vascular disease, various cancers and diabetes) are related, in varying degrees, to
diet. Having said that, it is also unavoidable that foods aimed at the poor—
‘convenience’ foods and fast foods, in particular—are very high in fats, salt and
sugar, all of which are known by both dietitians and the general public to contribute
to the development of fatal illnesses (Albritton 2009). Yet, such foods are not sold
on nutritional qualities alone but on their convenience and price. They are fast and
cheap, which are attractive qualities for people with limited time and money.
Furthermore, the multinational companies that market these products sell them

—a lifestyle of youth, beauty and happiness. This contrasts
with the reality of the food choices made by those with limited means who choose
food that does not go off quickly (unlike fresh fruit and vegetables), and which they
are confident their children will eat (in order to avoid wastage). In this context,
food loses its social or ceremonial qualities (because of the expense of catering for
a social gathering, for example) and people often miss meals in order to economise
(Barry & Yuill 2008).

Since most people stopped working hard physically, exercise has come to be seen
as a key means of producing and maintaining health because it reduces hypertension,
can help in losing weight, reduces stress and strengthens one’s cardiovascular system.
The need to take conscious exercise has largely come about through changes in the

class men

or at desks, for example, rather than undertake manual labour. We are e

‘drive, rather than walk, by the way our suburbs are designed. Similarly, the demand
that exercise be undertaken has resulted in a growth in the leisure industry, and in

organised exercise in gyms, at boot camps and exercise classes, in particular. These

are They require a level of surplus money and

energy that is unlikely for someone earning a low income and doing an exhausting (if

sedentary) job. In short, someone from a high socioeconomic group is much more

likely to be in a position to undertake the recommended level of exercise than some-

one from a low socioeconomic group, since tisk

(Wainwr ight 2008). Asocial construct that has
The last factor to be considered here is the avoidance of health risks. Irvine (2004) _ become animportant par of

contemporary health systems,
argues that we are living in an age of risk, in which individuals are constantly alerted which emphasise the potential
by medical professionals (in particular) to potential problems, or ‘risks’, inherent in ‘5 °'!Wng!napartater

. : . society and the need for the
almost every activity that is part of life. These and are Part individual to avoid such risks.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

of In other words, if

one exposes oneself to a ‘risk’ and falls ill as a result, SOE Re ere rere ima
the sick. One of the results of this surveillance of our everyday lives, they argue, is tha

individuals rather than
wider environmental and social factors), and that through this process the individual
becomes more . In this context, everyday activities such as

using a mobile phone (cause of brain tumours?) or eating particular foods (beef, after
the Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy, or ‘mad cow disease’, scare) can suddenly
become a health risk to be avoided. Such health alarms spread quickly despite any
firm research base to validate them, and arguabl

_ dependence (Wainwright 2008). It is clear that:

The interweaving of poverty, lack of education and poor social integration result in
diminished health at every stage of the life cycle. It is now clear that the inequality
of income—the difference between the richest and the poorest—is the single biggest
factor in the development of poor health. (White 2000: 338)

There is now a growing body of evidence supporting the contention that social
poverty chief among them. Cook

and Frank (2008), for example, found in a longitudinal study that ranean

ment than poverty, particularly food insecurity. Similarly the WHO’s Commission
on the Social Determinants of Health found that improving daily living conditions

and tackling the inequitable distribution of power, money and resources was more
(Kelly 2007). The report
argues that:

m The health of individuals and of populations is determined to a significant degree

m The social determinants of health produce widespread inequities in health within
and between societies

m The poor and the disadvantaged experience worse health than the rich and power-
ful, have less access to services and die younger in all societies

m The social determinants of health and illness and health inequities can be described
and measured although this is a complex process (Kelly & Mackenbach 2007: 7).

Part of this complex process is determined by the quality of people’s living and
working conditions. Some of these are individual, others are shaped by widespread
environmental change.

Environmental dangers

Biomedical knowledge and practice has played a strategic role in mastering the body
and its impulses so that it can be put to work at the service of capitalism. Today, aided
by dramatic and far-reaching cultural and material developments in biomedical science

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING t 166 )

and technology, the working body is investigated, tracked, monitored, evaluated and
disciplined with unparalleled thoroughness and meticulousness (Lock & Nguyen 2010).
Our environment is made up of both social and physical factors. One’s position
in the social structure both directly and indirectly determines the likelihood of
health and the likelihood of good medical care in times of ill health. Similarly, the
‘lifestyle’ indicators discussed above constitute part of our wider environment and
are linked, in turn, to the health choices we make.
for example,

hese are factors that are
, but there is one health concern that affects people relatively

equally in industrialised societies like ours, and that is our exposure to damaging

Many such hazards have been produced, sometimes knowingly, by companies
whose interests are short-term and motivated by profit (the tobacco industry is an
example of this); others have come to light only in retrospect (the connection between
asbestos and mesothelioma and other lung cancers, for example).

Yet, with these broad environmental concerns as a backdrop, there is no doubt that
the particular kind of work we do is a determinant of our exposure to a hazardous
workplace and, in the long term, a determinant of our health. In addition, many more
are disabled at work and have their working lives (and economic welfare) seriously
impaired. Agriculture, skilled trades, machine driving and labouring are all areas with
high rates of injury and death, and all are male-dominated occupations. Overall,
workers in industry who deal with hazardous chemicals or toxins, who work in dan-
gerous places, or who are asked to perform dangerous tasks, are vulnerable to such
injuries or even death.

The notion of individual responsibility for health touched on earlier neatly
dovetails with a discourse on the individualised responsibility for safety at work in
two connected ways. First, as Germov (2002) points out, ‘accident-proneness’ was
invented by industrial psychologists to explain workplace injury. Clearly, having been
appointed by the employer, it is not unlikely that these psychologists would find the
responsibility for injury to lie with the worker, rather than with the employer or the

industry itself. Consequently, workers are seen by the medical profession as being
- solely responsible for their own health, Second, when a worker suffers an injury, or is

killed, a corollary of the above is that the responsibility for this lies with the worker.
Germov calls this ‘victim-blaming’:

This is the process whereby social inequality is explained in terms of individuals being
solely responsible for what happens to them. (The ‘blame’ is usually based on assumed

psychological and/or biological inferiority.) It rests on a belief that all social problems

. (2002: 84)

Once again, this direction of attention and responsibility away from the institu-
tions that produce health risks to the individuals’ own responsibility for their well-

being can be seen as a means of reducing the pressure for employers to ensure that.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 166 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

those they employ are not put at risk, even though they are subject to the require-
ments of Safe Work Australia, the body that governs occupational safety standards.
This points to the fundamental conflict of interest between profitability and health—
a conflict mediated by trade unions, the medical profession and the law (through
occupational health and safety legislation).

Medicare and private medical insurance

Ultimately, if a sufficient number of deaths occur globally as a result of conscious
actions adhering to the logica of capital, it could be argued that the structural violence
in capitalism constitutes structural genocide. And, regardless of which specific

individuals constitute the capitalist class, structural genocide would persist because
they are compelled to abide by the internal logic of capital. Therefore it is the capitalist
system that is guilty of structural genocide. (Leech 2012: 20)

It is clear from the above discussion of social inequality and health that the main focus

of health promotion campaigns is

and an economic context. The corollary of such an approach by government agencies
is, first, that an individual’s health is largely his or her own responsibility and there is
a moral dimension involved in the lifestyle choices made.

. Within this model, the
individual is conceived of as a consumer of medicine—a person able to make an edu-
cated choice from a free market, and to select the service or product that best serves
his or her needs. Given that free market economics has become the reigning paradigm
for almost all service delivery, let us examine how realistic a conception this is.

First, the medical profession is a key stakeholder in the health system.

ional body e Australian
: Members

Medical Association) |

of a very particular demographic group are enabled to become members of the profes-
sion through an informal yet rigorous process of educational and then professional

accreditation.

ground or from an ethnic minority; around 50 per cent of patients, for example, nei-

ther follow medical advice nor comply with a treatment regimen. Similarly, when
recalcitrant patients have divergent views about their health from those of the doctor,
they are unlikely to change those views after the consultation (Morgan 2003).

Are such patients likely to take their business elsewhere? If they have the self-
confidence and the social and financial resources, they might seek a second opinion,
but it is more likely that they will not.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING t 166 )

This leads to the second feature of the medical system of concern here—its
resourcing. George and Davis (1998) argue that there are four types of medical system
which balance, to varying degrees, the public and private funding of patient care. In
Australia we have a relatively complicated system, which involves the states being
dependent on the federal government for funding. Briefly, we have a universal health-
care system (Medicare) that is financed through our taxation system, whereby all
workers pay a small proportion of their wages or salary to the Medicare levy. This
levy, in addition to income tax, helps provide for public hospitals and covers a pro-
portion (the ‘schedule fee’) of the amount a doctor charges for a consultation.

. The patient is responsible for paying the

proportion of the fee that is not covered by Medicare. One rationale for this fee struc-

ture promulgated Py economists is that making patients bear part of the cost of

The Medicare levy, historically, has been fixed at a level that takes it as axiomatic
that a large proportion of the population will have private medical insurance and
therefore not depend on the public health system for their care. Such patients might
well have consumer choice over who treats them and more control over how they are
treated. However, it appears that without government incentives and penalties to
encourage the taking out of private medical insurance, many Australians would not
have private health cover. On one hand, this shows confidence in our public health
system. Yet it may simply indicate the difficulty of selling a product (health insur-
ance) that people do not want currently and may or may not want in the future.

The movement away from the private sector led to the introduction of financial
incentives to induce people to return to private medical insurance. This shift from
private health is obviously a matter of concern for the AMA and individual doctors
alike, because it affects their income level. But it is also a concern for the government,
which argues that the public system cannot cope with the demand. This is likely to be
exacerbated by the growing numbers of older Australians with chronic complaints
and the increased use in medicine of expensive technologies. A number of induce-

ments have been used to force people to insure themselves: those earning above a
medical insurance, and the government offers . The

insurance companies themselves have used special offers—such as a period of time
during which, if you take out insurance, you will be covered at a rate as if you were 30
years old, no matter what your age.

There is also a basic ‘safety net’ for those too poor to afford any insurance and that
facilitates their treatment in public hospitals—Medicare. There are a number of stake-
holders in this debate, and in health generally: the government, the medical profes-
sion, the finance sector (through insurance premiums), the corporate sector (through
the interests of multinational pharmaceutical companies) and, finally, the patients
themselves. Even patients have different interests according to their income level.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 166 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Each stakeholder participates in the market economy, and economists argue that each
i . Yet, one consistent factor in this

t.

s interested in maximising his or her own interests
debate, and in health care generally, is that those with the greatest need for good-

CONCLUSION

Throughout this chapter we have discussed some of the ways in which health and illness can be seen as socially
constructed phenomena. Health itself is something that is continually being redefined, and different cultural
groups may well define it differently. The dominance of biomedicine and, in turn, its powerful capacity to

both define and treat illness was discussed here, as were some of the alternative visions of disease and health
provided by other health practitioners. The growing influence of the ‘clinical gaze’ was explored using the
example of medicalisation, v pacity | | Finally,
the issue of social inequality and its impact on health was explored, focusing on the state’s premise that health
is the individual’s responsibility and the contrary evidence which shows that, whatever health indicators are
used, those who are rich enjoy much better health than those who are not.

7 CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

With an increasingly ageing population, many of whom have chronic diseases which are

expensive to treat, do you think Australia should legalise euthanasia? Is this an economic

question? (LO1)
2. Isit possible for CAMs and biomedicine to exist alongside each other or are they too philosoph-

ically opposed? Should CAMs be on the Medicare system? (LO2)

3. Should people who have led unhealthy lives (insofar as they’ve smoked, had unsafe sex, drunk
heavily, taken drugs and eaten a diet high in saturated fats) have the same access to the health
system as those who have looked carefully after themselves? To what extent should free
health care be a universal right for all? (LO3)

4. lf you were working on an initiative to narrow the gap between the health status of Indigenous

and non-Indigenous Australians what measures would you put in place? (LO4)

Aakster, C.W. (1992) ‘Concepts in Alternative Medicine’, in A. Beattie, M. Gott, L. Jones & M. Sidell (eds), Health
and Well-being: A Reader, London, Macmillan, pp. 88-91.

Albritton, R. (2009) Let Them Eat Junk: How Capitalism Creates Hunger and Obesity, London, Pluto Press.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2011) Deaths, Australia, Cat. No. 3302.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) (2013) ‘Life Expectancy’, <http://www.aihw.gov.au/
life-expectancy>.

Barry, A-M. & Yuill, C. (2008) Understanding the Sociology of Health: An Introduction, 2nd edn, London, Sage.

Begg, S., Voss, T., Barker, B., Stevenson, C., Stanley, L. & Lopez, A.D. (2007) The Burden of Disease and Injury in
Australia 2003, Canberra, AIHW.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF

Bickerstaff, L. (2007) Stress, New York, Rosen Publications.

Burgess, A. (2008) ‘Health Scares and Risk Awareness’, in D. Wainwright (ed.), A Sociology of Health, London,
Sage, pp. 56-75.

Carson, B. (ed.) (2007) Social Determinants of Indigenous Health, Crows Nest, NSW, Allen & Unwin.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2013) ‘Pertussis Frequently Asked Questions’, <www.cdc.gov/
pertussis/about/faqs.html>.

Cohen, S., Janicki-Deverts, D., & Miller, G.E. (2007) ‘Psychological Stress and Disease’, Journal of the American
Medical Association, 298(14), pp. 1685-7.

Cook, J.T. & Frank, D.A. (2008) ‘Food Security, Poverty and Human Development in the United States’, Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1136, pp. 193-209.

Coulter, I.D. & Willis, EM. (2004) ‘The Rise and Rise of Complementary and Alternative Medicine: A Sociological
Perspective’, Medical Journal of Australia, 180(11), pp. 587-9.

Department of Health and Ageing (2013) Myths and Realities: Responding to Arguments against Vaccinations:
A Guide for Providers, Canberra, Commonwealth of Australia.

Easthope, G. (2004) ‘Complementary Medicine and Orthodox Medicine’, in C. Grbich (ed.), Health in Australia:
Sociological Concepts and Issues, Sydney, Pearson Education, pp. 310-33.

Foss, B. & Dyrstad, S.M. (2011) ‘Stress in Obesity: Cause or Consequence?’, Medical Hypotheses, 77(1), pp. 7-10.

Foucault, M. (1984) ‘The Order of Discourse’, in M. Shapiro (ed.), Language and Politics, Oxford, Basil Blackwell,
pp. 108-38.

George, J. & Davis, A. (1998) States of Health: Health and Iliness in Australia, Melbourne, Longman.

Germov, J. (ed.) (2002) Second Opinion: An Introduction to Health Sociology, 2nd edn, Melbourne, Oxford
University Press.

Giddens, A. (1996) In Defence of Sociology: Essays, Interpretations and Rejoinders, Cambridge, Polity Press.

Gilman, S.L. (2008) Fat: A Cultural History of Obesity, Cambridge, Polity Press.

Hawks, J.H. & Moyad, M.A. (2003) ‘CAM: Definition and Classification Overview’, Urologic Nursing, 23(3),
pp. 221-4.

Hay, L.L. (1999) You Can Heal Your Life, Sydney, Hay House Publishing.

Helman, C.G. (2000) Culture, Health and Illness, Oxford, Reed.

Hrdbjartsson, A. & Brorson, S. (2002) ‘Interpreting Results from Randomised Clinical Trials of Complementary/
Alternative Interventions: The Role of Trial Quality and Pre-trial Beliefs’, in D. Callahan (ed.), The Role
of Complementary and Alternative Medicine: Accommodating Pluralism, Washington, DC, Georgetown
University Press, pp. 107-21.

Hupkens, C.L.H., Knibbe, R.A. & Drop, M.J. (2000) ‘Social Class Differences in Food Consumption: The
Explanatory Value of Permissiveness and Health and Cost Considerations’, European Journal of Public
Health, 10, pp. 108-13.

Irvine, R. (2004) ‘Biomedical Surveillance and the Working Body’, in C. Grbich (ed.), Health in Australia:
Sociological Concepts and Issues, Sydney, Pearson Education, pp. 236-59.

Jones, F. (2001) Stress: Myth, Theory and Research, Harlow, Pearson Education.

Kelly, M.P. (2007) The Social Determinants of Health: Developing an Evidence Base for Political Action, Final Report

to World Health Organization, Commission on the Social Determinants of Health, Santiago, Universidad del
Desarrollo.

Largent, M.A. (2012) Vaccine: The Debate in Modern America, Baltimore, John Hopkins University Press.

Leech, G. (2012) Capitalism: A Structural Genocide, London, Zed Books.

Li, Z., Zeki, R., Hilder, L. & Sullivan, E.A. (2012) Australia’s Mothers and Babies 2010, Perinatal Statistics Series No.
27, Cat. No. PER 57, Canberra, AIHW, <http://www.aihw.gov.au/publication-detail/?id=60129542376>.

Lock, M. & Nguyen, V-K. (2010) An Anthropology of Biomedicine, Hoboken, NJ, Wiley-Blackwell.

Lupton, D. (2006) Medicine as Culture, 2nd edn, London, Sage.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Medicare (2014) ‘Australian Childhood Immunisation Register (ACIR) Statistics’, <www.medicareaustralia.gov.
au/provider/patients/acir/statistics.jsp>.

Morgan, M. (2003) ‘The Doctor-Patient Relationship’, in G. Scambler (ed.), Sociology as Applied to Medicine,
London, Elsevier Science, pp. 513-27.

Nattrass, N. (2012) The AIDS Conspiracy: Science Fights Back, New York, Columbia University Press.

O'Connor, B.B. (2002) ‘Personal Experience, Popular Epistemology and CAM Research’, in D. Callahan (ed.), The
Role of Complementary and Alternative Medicine: Accommodating Pluralism, Washington, DC, Georgetown
University Press, pp. 163-71.

Porwal, V. & Verma, A. (2013) ‘A Study on Obesity in Relation to Socio-Economic Status in Men and Women’,
National Journal of Community Medicine, 4(1), pp. 149-52.

Shang, A., Huwiler-Mintener, K., Nartey, L., Jini, P., Dorig, S., Sterne, J.A., Pewsner, D. & Egger, M. (2005) ‘Are
the Clinical Effects of Homoeopathy Placebo Effects? Comparative Study of Placebo-Controlled Trials of
Homoeopathy and Allopathy’, Lancet, 366(9487), pp. 726-32.

Singh, A.R. & Singh, A.S. (2008) ‘Diseases of Poverty, Well-Being and Human Development’, Mens Sana
Monographs, 6(1), pp. 187-225.

Twohig, J. (2009) ‘The Complementary and Alternative Health Care System in Australia’, in E. Willis, L. Reynolds
& H. Keleher (eds), Understanding the Australian Health Care System, Sydney, Churchill Livingstone.

Wainwright, D. (2008) ‘The Changing Face of Medical Sociology’, in D. Wainwright (ed.), A Sociology of Health,
London, Sage.

Walraven, G. (2012) Health and Poverty: Global Health Solutions, London, Taylor and Francis.

White, K. (2000) ‘Health and Illness’, in R. Jureidini & M. Poole (eds), Sociology, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

White, K. (2004) ‘The Social Origins of Illness and the Development of the Sociology of Health’, in C. Grbich
(ed.), Health in Australia: Sociological Concepts and Issues, Sydney, Pearson Education, pp. 37-54.

White, K. (2009) An Introduction to the Sociology of Health and Iliness, 2nd edn, London, Sage.

Wills, W., Backett-Milburn, K., Gregory, S. & Lawton, J. (2006) ‘Young Teenagers’ Perceptions of Their Own and
Others’ Bodies: A Qualitative Study of Obese, Overweight and “Normal” Weight Young People in Scotland’,
Social Science and Medicine, 62, pp. 396-406.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8

PERSONAL LIVES

PTER OUTLINE
—™@ This chapter begins by exploring the concept of ‘the family’ and some of the ways in which
individuals’ perceptions of the family have changed over the past 50 years.

‘ —™@ It focuses on the emergence of the nuclear family in the postwar period in Australia and
discusses some of the social and economic factors that precipitated its eventual adoption as
the preferred family form.

—® The growth in the separation rate and subsequent fragmentation of the nuclear family
is explored.

® The impact of separation on men, women and children is assessed in terms of the ways in
which individuals subsequently reform families in a variety of ways.

—® Finally, it explores the ways in which people are changing how they live, looking at
the growth in ‘living apart together’ (LAT) relationships, the growth in living alone
and the increasing importance of friendship.

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Explain the development of the nuclear
family norm

LO2 Discuss the causes of the changes made to
divorce laws and the subsequent changes
to people's relationship expectations

LO3 Analyse contemporary perspectives on
intimate relationships

LO4 Discuss new family and relationship
formations

LOS Explore the connections between
relationships and intimacy

© Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO1 Explain the
development of the
nuclear family norm

nuclear family
A family consisting of a married
couple and their own offspring.

domestic labour

The unpaid labour in a
household (washing, cooking,
cleaning, shopping, child care,
house maintenance and so on),
which is repetitive and essential
for the reproduction of each
individual.

Families are changing. Narrow definitions and meanings of family life have been
challenged and contested; there is increasing recognition that family forms are diverse
and dynamic. Changing patterns of partnership, parenthood, friendship and sociality
mean that the traditional (or perhaps more properly modern) conceptions of the
family can no longer be sustained at the centre of debates about families and family life.

(Lindsay & Maher 2013: 2)

There is no doubt that the ways in which people are living their personal lives are
changing quickly and dramatically. Within this context, ‘personal life’ refers to the
relationships which people value highly and where they can find intimacy, support,
understanding and companionship. These important areas of our lives are explored
in this chapter as we look at those parts of social life that have tended to be buried
underneath ‘the family’ in sociology—emotions, intimacy and sexuality, for example
(Smart 2007).

Not so long ago, there was an expectation among most adults that one would find
these critical needs met in a permanent, monogamous, sexual relationship; however,
as we will see later in this chapter, although people might expressly desire such a
relationship, the average person is much less likely to have one. New relationship
forms are emerging.

It is precisely because of the need to explore such new relationships that the
word ‘family’ has been omitted from the chapter’s title. As we will see, discussions
of the family have habitually centred on heterosexual, nuclear, middle-class
norms which can no longer adequately account for the ways in which we are
living today. Instead, for the first time, ‘the family’ is placed into the field of
personal life in this chapter, and not given priority over other relationships where
people are increasingly finding the intimacy, support, understanding and
companionship mentioned earlier.

Mi THE WAY WE WERE

There is no doubt that in contemporary Australia there is a preferred, privileged style
of family, and that is the nuclear family. This is a family form that emerged after
World War II in great numbers and has been dwindling since 1975. The nuclear
family consists of a married couple who live with their own offspring.

Traditionally, such families were associated with a particular set of gendered roles,
where the man was the main breadwinner and had a more powerful position within
the family than the woman, who either did not work at all or worked only part-time
so that she was able to undertake all the domestic labour. Aside from the roles men
and women adopted, the nuclear family historically had a very clear set of power
dynamics where the male was seen as the head of the household—both formally (his
wife and children would all be given his name, for example) and informally (men
undertook no domestic work and expected to have their personal needs catered for
by their wife).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES @®

A LIFE STORY
The following shows a typical relationship and domestic history of a woman born in 1930. As you
read through it, try to track the shifts in Ruth’s life with the economic, legal and social changes

occurring in Australia at that time:

1930 Ruth Swanton born in Launceston, Tasmania, to a married couple as the youngest of four.

necnon = =

1945 Leaves school and moves to Perth to start training as a nurse.

1951 Falls pregnant to David (a doctor she met at the hospital where she worked). Ruth and
David marry and their son Andrew is born later that year. Ruth gives up paid work.

1953 Son James is born.

1955 Daughter Susan is born.

1955-1965 Ruth remains at home as a housewife.

1965 With Susan settled at school, Ruth returns to work part-time as a nurse which she
continues until she retires at the age of 60 in 1990.

1968 David and Ruth separate after David has an affair. Ruth stays in the family home and has
custody of the three children who are now 17, 15 and 13. David pays child support to Ruth and
sees the children monthly.

1971 Ruth receives a divorce from David on the grounds of adultery. She receives only a small
proportion of the marital assets.

1972-1980 Lives with her children until they leave home to get married, then lives alone.
Becomes a grandmother.

1985 Meets second husband, Peter.

1988 Marries and lives with Peter. After retirement, Ruth has little superannuation and is largely
financially dependent on Peter. Both grandparents, they spend their time helping their children
with their grandchildren, socialising with friends and working voluntarily for a community legal
centre (Peter) and an opportunity shop (Ruth).

2000 Widowed when Peter dies suddenly.

2005- Begins a relationship with Michael (another volunteer at the op shop). Continues to live
alone, but sees Michael each Wednesday and they spend every weekend at one another's house.
They both see this as an ideal arrangement that offers them privacy, companionship and freedom
from gendered domestic roles. Neither of them wishes to leave their home and their belongings,
or to change their children’s inheritances. They are nevertheless recognised as a couple by both

their friends and family.

: Why did Ruth and David marry?

: Why did Ruth stop work in 1951?

: Why did Ruth not receive 50 per cent of the marital property when she divorced David?
: Are Ruth and Michael LATs?

: If Ruth had been born ten years later, how might her life have been different?

0 0 0 0 DOD DOD

: Thinking about your own life, and the ways in which people’s personal lives are changing, map

the lifestyle choices you are likely to make over the rest of your life.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

feminist

Feminism is a social movement
that is concerned with gender
inequalities in contemporary
societies. Feminists attempt to
analyse the causes of such
inequalities.

gender roles

The roles ascribed to men and
women within the domestic
sphere that relate to their sex.
They are informal yet widely
and consistently practised. A
simple example might be that
women should undertake
domestic labour within the
house and men the domestic
labour outside it.

household

A group of people who may or
may not be members of a
family but who live under

the same roof.

Why were nuclear families the favoured family form? One answer is that they
operated in such a way to privilege men (see Coontz 2005; Sullivan 2006). (See also
Chapter 16 for an overview of feminist theories as a whole.) Feminist theorists argued
that men benefited from the nuclear family on two different levels.

First, Australia had a strongly patriarchal state, which was run by men largely for
the benefit of men. Part of the ideological system that supports patriarchy is the belief
that women are responsible for providing services that, although essential, are seen as
being of low status precisely because they are ‘women’s work’. One example of this is
the care provided by women for children, the elderly and the disabled. Although the
state makes a contribution to their care, it is a variable contribution. If, for example,
the respite care for a disabled child is withdrawn through government cutbacks, it is
women (usually mothers) who increase their workload to compensate. In this way,
the patriarchal state exploits women’s unpaid labour and uses the nuclear family as a
means of privatising such care.

Second, individual men benefited enormously from living within a nuclear family,
particularly if they managed to maintain traditional gender roles where their wives took
care of the domestic labour. They were enabled by this to engage freely with the work-
force, enjoying the salary and status—and, for middle-class men, the power that comes
with this. In addition, men had their emotional and sexual needs met by women within
this family form. This seemed quite reasonable, of course, until feminists started to ques-
tion whether anyone met the needs of the woman in this type of family arrangement.

Another explanation for the nuclear family being the preferred family form in
contemporary Australia is offered by Marxist theorists. Although this has been dis-
puted by some historians (see Laslett 1972), it seems likely that the nuclear family
emerged after the industrial revolution. Prior to that, households were made up of
parents, children, extended family members, servants and itinerant workers.
Marriages tended to end through death rather than by divorce, and widows and
widowers in turn often remarried. This meant that, even in the 19th century,
households commonly consisted of loose groups of related and non-related adults
and children.

This pattern changed after industrialisation. Nuclear families were useful for
industrial capitalism because they were small and transportable—if there was a need
for workers in one part of the country, it was much easier to pack up the wife and kids
than it was to move the company or factory. As we will see later in the chapter, this is
even more the case when people live alone.

Another advantage of the nuclear family for capitalism has been touched on
already: women could provide human support services that otherwise would have to
be provided by the state. In addition, they did this for free. They nursed the sick,
looked after the old, and provided care for children and the disabled. They still do
this, and undertake a large amount of essential volunteer work in kindergartens,
schools and community centres.

In Australia, the nuclear family became an explicitly promoted institution by a series
of governments after World War II. The following excerpt from the Commonwealth-state

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES @®

housing agreement of 1945 highlights the connections between capitalism, nationalism
and patriarchy encapsulated by the nuclear family:

The safety of this country, like the safety of all other countries, depends on private
home ownership which gives a man a stake in his country, a place of his own in which
to keep his wife and rear a family, and a place for his family to live when he has died.

A man whose home is his own has the satisfaction of knowing that every tree that
he plants in the garden, every cupboard that he installs, every improvement he makes
is his own. That is the attitude of almost every man worth his family. (Australian
Senate 1945)

During the postwar era, the married, heterosexual, co-resident couple was the
centrepiece of social life and marriage rates were comparatively very high. Unlike
today, all couples held their wedding services in
a church and the wedding ceremony itself was
considered to be a solemn and sacred set of vows
which had religious meaning for the couple. As
we will see later, some social groups continue to
assign a religious value to marriage which has
become much less significant for the majority of
the population.

Figure 8.1 follows the crude marriage rate
from 1900 through to 2010. As you can see, the
rates of marriage are very closely related to
people’s social world—they rise at times of war,
and fall during times of economic depression.

TUT SS 50) Crude marriage rate, 1900-2010

12
1914: WWI
40- 1930: Great Depression
1940: WWII
1970: Vietnam War
874
674
44
—@ Marriage per 1000 population
2
a ieee ae ps SL es oe ee eee
S ~ fo) be \2) Ne) 4 O 1S.) 32.) Xe.) ~) ) o te) ~
PO Pe SP SS Pe OS ae aS

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2011) Marriages and Divorces, Australia, Cat. No. 3310.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

patriarchy

Asocial system where older
men have power over young
men, women and children. This
power rests in both the public
and private spheres. Patriarchy
has two principal meanings in
feminist discourse: a general
usage of it as the systematic
domination of women by men,
and a psychoanalytical account
of it as the ‘law of the father’.

© Shutterstock.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO2 Discuss the
causes of the

changes made to
divorce laws and the
subsequent changes
to people's relationship
expectations

BTS") Divorce per 1000 population in Australia, 1955-2011

5
4.5- —@— Divorce per 1000 population
4-
3.55
3-
2.55
2-4
1.5
il =
0.55

0)
1955 ' 1965 ' 1975 ' 1985 ' 1995 ' 2005 ' 2007 ' 2009 ' 2011

Crude rate per 1000

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2013) Marriages and Divorces, Australia, 2012 , Cat. No. 3310.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

Following from a marriage in the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s was the almost certainty
of children (unless the couple had fertility problems), and the norm at that time was
around three. Cherlin termed these marriages ‘“companionate marriages’ because the
couple ‘based their gratification on playing marital roles well: being good providers,
good homemakers and responsible parents’ (2004: 851). People’s sense of themselves
was strongly bound to the satisfaction of building a family and maintaining a home,
and to the roles of being a spouse and a parent. In order to divorce, one of the couple
had to prove serious marital misconduct (such as adultery, abuse, drunkenness or
desertion) against the other. Unlike today, divorce was relatively unusual and viewed
as a marker of personal shame and failure.

Figure 8.2 tracks the Australian divorce rate over about 55 years. It is easy to see
that the number of divorces was low and steady until 1975 when there was a large
increase. Since then, the rate has been relatively high and recently declining since
fewer people now get married.

So, what happened?

i A PERIOD OF TRANSITION

In 1975 the Commonwealth government passed the Family Law Act, which meant
that people could cite ‘irretrievable breakdown’ of marriage as the only cause of
divorce. This is often referred to as ‘no-fault’ divorce. When this Act was passed in
Australia, the number of divorces rose very quickly (probably because many people
waited for its passing before filing for divorce, creating a backlog). This change in the
law marked a watershed in the ways in which Australians viewed both themselves and
how they wanted to live. The era of the companionate marriage came to an end both
as a demographic norm and as a cultural ideal (Cherlin 2004). The drivers of this
change were, in the main, women.

First, married women began to enter the labour market and to earn an independ-
ent income. This was linked to both a transformation of the types of work that were

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES @®

available (a growth in the service industries, for example) and to variations in gender
roles which emerged, enabling women to stop thinking of themselves as necessarily
economically dependent on men. (See Chapter 4 for an extended discussion of
changes to gender and work.) Alongside this came the legislative amendments
brought about by the women’s movement which ensured, for example, that women
were paid the same as men for doing the same work, and that it was unlawful to dis-
criminate against women when they applied for a job.

Second, for the first time, women and men began to live together without marry-
ing, and to have children outside marriage, and women began to have children alone,
by choice. In short, marriage with the traditional constraints that had typified it dur-
ing the 1950s and 1960s became less popular and the ways in which heterosexuals, at
least, could arrange their lives became more diverse. This led to the rise of the cultural
ideal of a more egalitarian marriage in which women were more empowered than
they were in the companionate marriage and where both parties have the expectation
that neither will wield power over the other, that both will work, for example, make
important decisions together and share in organising the household. In short, gender
roles and expectations were changing.

Resistance to the changes to divorce and marriage

It is important to recognise that the broad social changes outlined above have not
evolved seamlessly. There are many groups who still believe strongly that marriage is
the keystone of a civilised society and that divorce numbers should be reduced by
making it much more difficult to get. They are attached to the idea that patriarchal
gender roles are essential for good social order. In a small-scale study of such groups
in Australia, for example, one of the participants argued:

The thirteenth century was the peak of civilization ... because in the Western world ...
it was Christendom in its full flower. Belief in God and the moral order and the
understanding of the natural law ... From that time on, we’ve gone steadily downhill ... in
our civilization ... Something new has happened ... the spread of atheism ... The beginning
of the destruction is the idea that you can separate sex from procreation and that you
can use other people for your own gratification instead of giving within the context of
marriage. (Quoted in Wyatt & Hughes 2009: 250-1)

In other parts of the world there have been attempts to reduce the number of
divorces through changing the nature of the marriage contract itself. The American
state of Louisiana, for example, introduced two kinds of marriage in 1997, and 20
other US states have since considered doing the same (Nock et al. 2008). The first,
called a ‘covenant’ marriage, involves the couple providing an affidavit stating that
they have undergone pre-marriage counselling which emphasises the serious and
lifelong nature of the marriage. The grounds for divorce are ‘traditional fault-based
reasons: adultery; a felony conviction that results in life imprisonment or death;
physical or sexual abuse of a spouse or a child of the spouse; and abandonment’

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


