“J
a changing society

DAVID HOLMES KATE HUGHES) ROBERTA JULIAN


a changing society


Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


=_J
a changing society

HOLMES HUGHES JULIAN

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015

Pearson Australia
707 Collins Street
Melbourne VIC 3008

www.pearson.com.au

The Copyright Act 1968 of Australia allows a maximum of one chapter or 10% of this book, whichever is the greater, to be
copied by any educational institution for its educational purposes provided that that educational institution (or the body that
administers it) has given a remuneration notice to Copyright Agency Limited (CAL) under the Act. For details of the CAL
licence for educational institutions contact:

Copyright Agency Limited, telephone: (02) 9394 7600, email: info@copyright.com.au

All rights reserved. Except under the conditions described in the Copyright Act 1968 of Australia and subsequent amendments,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.

Senior Learning Architect: Lucy Elliott
Development Editor: Greg Tantala

Project Managers: Katie Millar and Bernadette Chang
Copyright and Pictures Editor: Lisa Woodland
Production Coordinator: Caroline Stewart
Copy Editor: Maryanne Phillips

Proofreader: Nicole Le Grand

Indexer: Garry Cousins

Cover design by Natalie Bowra

Cover illustration © PILart/Shutterstock
Typeset by Aptara’, Inc.

Printed in Malaysia
12345 19 18 17 16 15

National Library of Australia
Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

Author: Holmes, David, author.

Title: Australian sociology : a changing society / David Holmes,
Kate Hughes, Roberta Julian.

Edition: 4th edition.

ISBN: 9781486003310 (paperback)

ISBN: 9781486007202 (Vital Source)

Subjects: Sociology—Australia.

Social change—Australia.

Australia—Social conditions.

Other Authors/Contributors:
Hughes, Kate Pritchard, author.
Julian, Roberta, author.

Greig, Alastair, contributor.

Dewey Number: 301.0994

Every effort has been made to trace and acknowledge copyright. However, should any infringement have occurred, the
publishers tender their apologies and invite copyright owners to contact them. Due to copyright restrictions, we may have been
unable to include material from the print edition of the book in this digital edition, although every effort has been made to
minimise instances of missing content.


CONTENTS

Preface ix
Acknowledgements xiii

CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS SOCIOLOGY? David Holmes 1
What does sociology study? 4

How does sociology study? The sociological imagination 6

Conclusion 15

Critical thinking questions 15

References 16

CHAPTER 2 CLASS Alastair Greig and David Holmes 17
Measuring inequality 19

Theories of class 22

Classes in Australia 30

Conclusion 36

Critical thinking questions 36

References 37

CHAPTER3 #ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA'S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES

Roberta Julian (with Carol Pybus) 39
Structural inequality 42
Colonialism and dispossession 45
Aboriginal identity: Who is an Aborigine? 50
Demographic and social profile 53
Racism and reconciliation:‘Uneasy conversations’
and emergent dialogues 60
Conclusion 62
Critical thinking questions 62
References 63
CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER kate Hughes 68
‘Sex’ and ‘gender’ are not synonymous 69
At the individual level 72
Gender in wider society 78
Conclusion 88
Critical thinking questions 88
References 89

CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING

THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? Roberta Julian 90
The meaning of ‘ethnicity’ 91
Ethnicity, migration and settlement 100
Trends in Australian immigration 102
Settlement policy: From assimilation to multiculturalism 107

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Immigrants in Australia 110

Ethnicity and national identity 119

Conclusion 121

Critical thinking questions 121

References 122

CHAPTER6 =THEKNOWLEDGE GENERATION Kate Hughes 130

Who is doing it—and why? 131

What does education do to you? 134

Secondary education 139

Gender and class in secondary education 142

Tertiary education 148

The new knowledge economy 149

Conclusion 151

Critical thinking questions 152

References 152

CHAPTER7 ILLNESS, HEALTH AND THE PURSUIT OF WELLBEING Kate Hughes 155

What is ‘health’? 156

Ways of defining and managing illness and health 159

The clinical gaze 166

The distribution of health and illness 169

Conclusion 176

Critical thinking questions 176

References 176

CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES Kate Hughes 179

The way we were 180

A period of transition 184

The way weare 188

Conclusion 201

Critical thinking questions 202

References 202

CHAPTER9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? Roberta Julian 205

What is deviance? 206

Explaining deviant behaviour—theories of deviance 208

Deviance and social order 209

Deviance and culture 211

Deviance and power 213

Deviance and social control 215

Deviance and difference 218

Crime and deviance in Australia 220

Conclusion 228

Critical thinking questions 228

References 228

CHAPTER10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT Alastair Greig 233
The industrial revolution, the division of labour

and classical sociology 234

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


The labour process after the industrial revolution 236
Work, classes and industrial relations 240
Work, gender and family 244
Unemployment and its solutions: Are we facing an‘end of work’? 248
Conclusion 251
Critical thinking questions 252
References 252
CHAPTER11 POWERANDTHE STATE Alastair Greig 256
The democratic basis of modern power 258
The class basis of modern power 262
The rational basis of modern power 265
Foucault and the reconceptualisation of power 268
The state of the future 272
Conclusion 275
Critical thinking questions 275
References 276
CHAPTER12 RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY Roberta Julian 278
What is religion? 279
Theories of religion 281
Religion and social change 284
Religion in Australia 287
Religious expression in modernity and postmodernity 288
Conclusion 298
Critical thinking questions 298
References 299
CHAPTER13 GLOBALISATION AND THE CITY Alastair Greig 303
Economic globalisation 304
The phases of imperialism 305
Global inequalities 309
Cultural globalisation and mobility 312
Globalisation and the commodification of everything 316
The city and cultural globalisation 318
The city and economic globalisation 321
Conclusion 323
Critical thinking questions 324
References 324
CHAPTER 14 FROM MASS MEDIA TO SOCIAL MEDIA David Holmes 327
What is ‘the media’? 328
The media in Australia 329
Theories of mass media 334
The media as an ideological state apparatus 336
The media and the industrialisation of culture 337
The media as popular culture 338
The mass media as ‘simulacra’—Jean Baudrillard 340
The medium is the message—Marshall McLuhan 341
The networked society 341

CONTENTS @

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

The social media Leviathan 343
Rituals of media 346
Conclusion 347
Critical thinking questions 348
References 348
CHAPTER 15 CHANGING THE CLIMATE: MODERNITY AT ITS LIMITS David Holmes 350
The science of global warming 354
Climate change impacts for Australia 362
The politics of climate change 367
The sociology of science and technology 370
Technoscience and climate change 371
Conclusion 372
Critical thinking questions 372
References 372
CHAPTER 16 SOCIOLOGICAL THEORY David Holmes 374
The great transformation 375
Intellectual precursors of sociology 377
The emergence of sociology as a discipline 378
Twentieth-century sociological theory 395
The Anthropocene and the end of the social sciences 408
Conclusion 410
Critical thinking questions 410
References 411
CHAPTER 17) HOWTO CARRY OUT A SIMPLE RESEARCH PROJECT Kate Hughes
THIS CHAPTER Research methodologies
IS ONLINE The research process
ONLY Analysing and presenting the results
Conclusion
Critical thinking questions
References
Glossary 413
Index 427

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


PREFACE

Welcome to the fourth edition of Australian Sociology: A Changing Society.

This book provides an overview of the discipline of sociology through an analysis
of Australian society. In doing so, it draws on a diverse range of perspectives as well as
myriad topics that go to issues at the core of Australian social life.

Some of these issues, such as social division and inequality, raise questions about
the structure of Australian society; while others, such as health, religion, media, work
and deviance, point to how this structure is reproduced over time.

The study of social structure inherits perspectives that have survived since the
founding of sociology as a discipline. These perspectives, which are presented in
the sociological theory chapter in a more compact form—now located at the end of
the volume—continue to frame the way sociology adapts to social change. But the
study of altogether new social realities, such as the speed of globalisation today,
profound changes in the nature of identity in the modern world, and the global
threat to social organisation posed by climate change, requires new and
interdisciplinary forms of analysis.

In this edition, recent changes affecting traditional divisions of class, race, ethnicity
and gender have been documented and analysed with the latest statistics. The rise of
neo-liberalism, and the impact of globalisation on education are covered, while the
sociological implications of new education policies are also examined. Economic
models of education delivery are investigated, such as the changing funding formulas
for secondary schools and the emergence of free courses at universities delivered by
MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses). Perhaps the most extensive revisions are
evident in the chapter on class, not simply with the statistics but by exploring new
ways of measuring class stratification. Global inequality is also re-examined in the
chapter on globalisation and the city—much expanded in the world today, with more
than half the world’s population living in metropolitan cities.

Three chapters that stand out for the way they suggest a shift in the field of sociology
itself are Personal Lives (Chapter 8), Changing the Climate: Modernity at Its Limits
(Chapter 15) and From Mass Media to Social Media (Chapter 14). The former chapter
is premised on the observation that the modern ‘family’ as a unit is no longer
recognisable as it once was. The once-heralded social unit of the nuclear family
continues its steady decline, as blended families and postmodern living arrangements
such as heteronormativity, living alone, living apart together, living with friends, and
the living patterns of adult children of divorce become increasingly common forms of
the household unit. The importance of friendship networks and the complex influences
on personal life have eclipsed the sociology of the family to the point where an entire
branch of sociology needs to be recast.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

The chapter that perhaps presents a dramatic challenge to the sociological field itself
is the chapter on climate change. This chapter, which first appeared in the last edition
and is fully updated here, tackles what is arguably the most pressing issue facing global
society—the threat that climate change poses to the continuation of modern social
life. The idea that human society has evolved during the relatively climate-stable period
of the Holocene, roughly the 10 000 years leading up to 1750, come to be challenged by
the terraforming and climate-altering impact of humans, now recast as the Anthropocene
human history since 1750, when industrial emissions of greenhouse gases began. The
chapter explores the science of climate change in detail, climate change scepticism and
radicalism, the debate about human-induced causes of climate change, and the
sociology of technology that informs understandings of the conflict between nature
and culture.

A third major standout area that is featured in this book is the extraordinary take-up
of social media in Australia and around the world. Australians are the heaviest per
capita users of social media in the world today, with 66 per cent of the population
logging in daily to Facebook alone. The social media leviathan has really confounded
the forecasts of the early 1990s when the internet became fully domesticated, as the
importance of using the internet to continue social relationships that people already
have offline has proven to be much moreimportant than the anonymous communication
of the avatar.

But more important still, is the ability to personalise our relationships with social
media, to feel like we have control over them with our privacy settings, our profile
pages and the way we can present a self-for-others. In a way, social media sits at the
heart of a paradox in modern social life, which is the simultaneous expansion and
contraction of everyday life. On the one hand, social media is a networking technology
of global scale, the culmination of a truly connected world. On the other hand the
basis of our connection can be as small as the smartphone in our pocket or the
thumbnail of smart apps depicted on the front cover of this book. But between
the incredible reach of this global connectivity to the private rituals of how we use
our phone, there is the possibility that the public sphere in between these extremes
has begun to disappear, as the street, our institutions and the social forms founded
on physical assembly have been overtaken by the electronic assembly.

Aside from the sociological material, the book includes a number of crucial teaching
and learning tools in order to make it an easy and productive book to use by both
students and lecturers. You will find at the start of each chapter, for example, a chapter
outline which is a summary of its contents, and throughout each chapter a set of
learning outcomes. Within each chapter there are a number of feature boxes, which
highlight or expand an issue discussed, or offer a case study. In addition, you will find
highlighted key terms defined and their use discussed in the margin notes and
consolidated in the glossary at the end of the book.

At the conclusion of each chapter there are a number of features which will assist
students to develop their learning further. There are a series of critical thinking

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


questions, which challenge readers to interrogate some of the issues raised in the
chapter. On the Pearson website there is a list of texts which are recommended as
further reading, or as reference books. Here you will also find an annotated list of
websites and other multimedia that can assist with everything from statistical data to
discussion groups to non-government organisations interested in the material
discussed in the chapter. Also available on the website is Chapter 17, which provides
research tools for undertaking field research projects. It includes a discussion of
statistical software packages, the ethics of research and a step-by-step guide to the
selection of topics, methods and the writing-up phases of research.

In conclusion, we hope that you enjoy Australian Sociology and that it enables you
to understand more clearly both the society we live in and the ways in which it is likely
to develop in the future. Most important of all, we hope it helps you to do this critically.

David Holmes
Kate Hughes
Roberta Julian
Alastair Greig

PREFACE @

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

David Holmes
First, it is a pleasure to welcome Alastair Greig on board for this edition to
reinvigorate the chapters on Class, The Working Environment, Power and the
State, and Globalisation and the City.

Second, I am most grateful for the continuity provided by Lucy Elliott at Pearson,
who has been enthusiastically overseeing the production of this text for two
editions now. Again, the production team at Pearson has set a high standard for
the authors to work to, and our copy editor Maryanne Phillips has been excellent
to work with.

For gaining the insights needed to rewrite the From Mass Media to Social Media
chapter, I am grateful to all my undergraduate and postgraduate students who
keep me in touch with the frontiers of new media. In particular, I have included
some work co-authored with my Honours student, Anna Matwijiw, on Facebook,
which has been previously published at The Conversation, where it attracted a
great deal of interest.

Special thanks are due to those who assisted me with the revision of the Climate
Change chapter, especially all the readers of my climate change column at The
Conversation, who make helpful comments ... and, of course, the resistance trolls.
One of the In Focus boxes, ‘Four Hiroshima Bombs a Second’ has previously been
published in The Conversation as part of a trilogy on how we imagine climate
change. I would also like to thank Len Puglisi and Phil Alford who have kept
me in touch with how climate change developments have been covered in the
mainstream media. My gratitude also goes out to the Faculty of Arts at Monash
University for providing me with sabbatical leave in 2014 which has allowed me
to take on projects I had postponed in revising some of these chapters.

Kate Hughes
Iam grateful to Professor Roger Slee and my colleagues at the Victoria Institute for
Education, Diversity and Lifelong Learning at Victoria University for providing
me with the support to work on this book. Thanks also to David Lee for his
indulgence and discernment in understanding what works and what doesn't. To
Owen, Brenda, Alex, Shannon, Ana, Nathan and Chris—their guidance over the
dinner table kept me on target.

Roberta Julian

I wish to thank my colleagues and postgraduate students in the School of Social
Sciences at the University of Tasmania, particularly those at the Tasmanian
Institute of Law Enforcement Studies, for their support and interest in my

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS @

research and teaching. Thanks also to Dr Jackie Hallam who provided timely
research assistance in chasing the latest relevant studies and journal articles
for this edition. Most importantly I thank my partner, Michael Best, and our
two wonderful children, Zoe and Jacob, for their constant support and their
unquestioning acceptance of my long working hours. I would like to dedicate
this edition to my mother, Dorothy Julian, whose capacity to overcome life-
threatening events and rise above the daily difficulties of coping with her
physical health problems is amazing. She is an inspiration to all of us.

The publisher would like to thank the following reviewers:
David Hodgson

Edith Cowan University

Dr Meredith Nash

University of Tasmania

Dr Phillip Ablett
University of Sunshine Coast

Dr Gisela van Kessel
University of South Australia
Dr Lou Wilson

University of South Australia

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 1

WHAT IS SOCIOLOGY?

\PTER OUTLINE

® This chapter introduces the central themes and problems that define sociology.

© Apreliminary sketch of the concept of ‘society’ is given in order to indicate the range of
areas that sociology is capable of addressing.

™@ It considers what sociology studies and outlines the primary social ‘objects’ of the discipline,
which at their broadest include capitalism, modernity and patriarchy.

© Forms of sociological imagination are described to demonstrate how sociology conducts
its investigation. The historical, anthropological and critical dimensions of the sociological
imagination are detailed.

® The chapter also highlights the political nature of sociological knowledge. It explains how
sociology relates to the practical world and to our policies on social issues and society as a
whole.

—® Lastly, the importance of comparing the different perspectives offered by sociology is
stressed. By comparing available perspectives, students of sociology are able to decide for
themselves how to approach both large and small problems in social life.

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Describe the field of investigation that
sociology studies

LO2 Explain how sociology’s concern with
inequality and power is linked to social
reproduction and social change

LO3 Describe the origins of the sociological
imagination and the different forms it has
taken

LO4 Explain how the methods employed by the
sociological imagination have political
implications

© Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


2) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

society

In an everyday sense,

‘society’ describes the social
arrangements that take place
within national boundaries.
Sometimes, however, society is
used in ways that transcend the
nation-state, as in ‘Kurdish’
society. Sociologists employ an
even more general sense of
society as inclusive of all forms
of association. Society does not
have to have a homogeneous
unity, as in 19th-century
conceptions of ‘community’;
rather, it is often posited in
opposition to the idea of
‘community’ as a form of
association that is pluralistic,
multilayered, but nevertheless
structured according to a
particular ‘social formation’.

It is when the social world loses its character as a natural phenomenon that the
question of the natural or conventional character of social facts can be raised.

(Bourdieu 1987: 169)

When do we feel most at home? When do you feel most at home? The answers to
these questions invariably depend on your social position and your identity in society.

What is it about our environment that helps us feel secure? Sociology, the study of
society, is a hybrid term that combines the Greek word socius, ‘companionship’, with
the Latin ology, ‘the study of. But companionship is only the smallest unit of a social
relationship. As we shall see in this book, social relationships can be very complex,
with many kinds of barriers and divisions within social life that prohibit or discourage
certain kinds of relationships. The layers of meaning we give to these relationships
also derive from our sense of belonging to them. Therefore, we may feel ‘at home’ in
a range of contexts—in an intimate relationship, with our family, with our neighbour-
hood, our suburb, our city, our nation; indeed, some may feel equally at home any-
where in the world. However, the latter sense of home, which globalisation has made
possible, is not nearly so common as our tendency to identify more locally or nation-
ally. For example, when we say we ‘live in a society’ this usually refers to the com-
monsense notion of living within the boundaries of a national territory. Within such
a sense of ‘society’, additional contexts of belonging are possible—our workplace, the
local shopping centre, the university, our household. Wherever we find attachment
and belonging, we are never removed from the principle of association represented
by the concept of ‘society’.

Throughout this book, we view the concept of society from ever more general per-
spectives of organised knowledge. In the process, new and unique understandings of
social realities, both large and small, will come into view. The variety of perspectives
that provide these new visibilities make up the discipline of sociology.

Sociology, as Berger (1976) observes, trains us for “seeing the general in the particu-
lar’. It provides a body of organised knowledge for understanding social collectivities
and the place of social activities within them. Of course, within sociology there are, in
turn, numerous perspectives for arriving at an interpretive understanding of social
reality, but what is common to each of these perspectives is that they somehow allow
us to ‘see through’ the everyday layers of meaning by which we most commonly under-
stand our world, and enable us to explain things that seemed inexplicable previously.

Part of the reason for this is that sociology not only gives everyday life new mean-
ings: it posits the existence of new kinds of social ‘furniture’ that might previously
have been invisible to us but which, once visible, may seem indispensable to a better
understanding of the social world.

Consider the example of class, a social reality explored in depth in Chapter 2. Most
of us have an understanding of belonging to a class—as a group or as a rank in a hier-
archy. We might even project assumptions about hierarchy on to other everyday
realities. When our favourite sportsperson does well, we might describe him or her as

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS SOCIOLOGY? r 2)

a ‘classy’ performer. Consciousness of class pervades much of our lives, our ambitions,
our sense of power and opportunity. But where do classes come from? Have there
always been classes? Are classes just social rankings that we are born into, or are they
forces of change? Investigating class further opens up new, unfamiliar layers of under-
standing the social world that often question our familiar, ‘commonsense’ outlook.

Gender is yet another example. Many of us think of gender as ‘natural’; that gender
is somehow a correlate of ‘sex’, of being male or female (see Chapter 4). Men are
attributed with a set of ‘masculine’ qualities and women ‘feminine’. Until quite
recently, sex and gender have been seen as inextricable. This situation began to
change in Australia and in many capitalist nations over the past 50 years, when the
match between gender—socially prescribed attributes—and ‘sexed’ individuals began
to decouple. Sex and gender have undergone a limited separation; some are anxious
about this, and others applaud it. Of course, advertisements on television and toys at
the supermarket continue to suggest stereotypes for men and women, boys and girls.
But in other areas of culture, especially in the workplace and the home, gender roles
have shifted, and the previous correspondence between gender and sex has been
blurred. Women are moving into traditional ‘male’ jobs and men are conversely
undertaking many domestic tasks that society once ascribed to women. But how far
has this separation gone? Does gender remain central to self-identity? Do individuals
feel a need to be identified as ‘gendered’ because it gives them easy access to a secure
role? And is such a role as ‘easy’ and secure for women and/or for men? What forces
maintain this distribution of identity known as gender?

Both of these phenomena, class and gender, are on the one hand very familiar to
us, but they are also more than the social furniture of everyday life, as we shall see. For
example, most sociologists view ‘class’ as a global phenomenon. However, many of us
think of class in terms of status only, and compare ourselves to others in our own
street, or city or nation, through the category of class. Although we rarely compare
ourselves to people in other nations in class terms, most of the quality of life that is
enjoyed in a first-world nation such as Australia can be shown to derive from a glo-
bally divided class system.

Sociology provides us with theories, perspectives and a massive assembly of social
facts through which to understand the most universal realities such as globalisation,
down to the seemingly most personal realities, such as the act of suicide. In doing so,
sociology shares with philosophy two major concerns—ontology and epistemology.
Ontology is the study of ‘what exists’, whereas epistemology is the study of ‘how we
know what exists’. In Chapter 16, we shall see how the epistemology we use, how we
view and research the world, may alter our understanding of what exists. At the same
time, an appreciation that the world is changing, and therefore that ‘ontology’ is
changing regardless of the theories we have about it, is an equally important factor in
arriving at social explanations.

The relationship between what exists and the certainty of our theories about
social reality has been cause for many hundreds of volumes in sociology, so much

ontology

The study of ‘what exists’. In
sociology, many entities have
been advanced as being the
Most important ‘ontologies’ for
developing a general theory of
society, including individuals,
classes, groups, discourses and
institutions.

epistemology

The study of ‘how we know’
what we are studying. This area
of sociology is concerned with
the ‘methodology’ of the social
sciences. Is sociology a ‘science’
in the same way as the natural
sciences are? How does
sociology overcome the
problem that the researcher is
part of the social world he or
she is examining? Can sociology
be value-free or theory-neutral?

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


2) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO1 Describe the field
of investigation that
sociology studies

inequality

The uneven distribution

of wealth and power in
society. Such distribution is
patterned according to the
division of definite groups and
classifications, including class,
gender, ethnicity and race.

power
The study of power has
become a centrepiece of
modern sociology. In some
perspectives it replaces concern
with the study of inequality.
The main debate about power
is that between ‘agency’ and
‘structure’'—how much agency
individuals have, as opposed to
the constraints imposed by
larger social forces that they
must endure.

LO2 Explain how
sociology’s concern
with inequality and

power is linked to
social reproduction

and social change

so that the ‘sociology of knowledge’ has become a branch of sociology in its own
right. This vexed and problematic relationship between theories and facts, descrip-
tion and explanation, is common to all areas of knowledge. For sociology, however,
the relationship is unique. It differs from other areas of knowledge in one very
important respect: it is about humans studying themselves. Sociologists are part of
the very object of study that they examine. For this reason, studying sociology
potentially entails what is called an ‘epistemological circle’: in other words, it is
impossible for a researcher of human affairs to be value-free, because his or her
personal values will distort or obscure the reality being investigated. Methodologically,
therefore, sociology has sought to overcome this dilemma of how a researcher can
strive for objectivity, or indeed whether such an aim is achievable at all, a matter to
which we shall return.

Mi WHAT DOES SOCIOLOGY STUDY?

At its most ambitious, sociology attempts to understand human societies from a
wholistic point of view—what they are composed of, how they are reproduced over
time and how they might differ from other societies. From the point of view of this
more general understanding, sociology also looks at the way societies are divided
according to a range of types of individuality and group identities.

Fundamentally, this means examining the nature of inequality in society, the pat-
terned ways in which groups and individuals are not only differentiated but are
accorded different positions in the social hierarchy. Of course, as an academic exer-
cise it is possible to differentiate societies in all kinds of arbitrary ways. We can dis-
tinguish between those who walk to work and those who drive, between those who
wear denim and those who do not, between those who listen to radio and those who
prefer to read newspapers. What is important for sociologists is not classification as
an end in itself, but particular divisions that influence people’s access to social power
and social identity.

The most important markers in this regard are class, gender, race, ethnicity, age
and sexuality. Whereas the other ways of differentiating persons and groups strike
us as arbitrary, sociologists have been concerned to show how the patterning of
power and inequality in society at large is conditioned by systemic or structural
realities related to these particular markers. To the extent that some inequalities can
be shown to be systemic, sociology is able to reveal how such inequalities are repro-
duced over time, as well as the degree to which they exist beyond the control of
individuals.

Inequalities in class, for example, have been tied to the historical reproduction of
feudal and capitalist societies as systemic social formations. Inequalities in gender—
the way in which society assigns certain properties and rights to men and others to
women—have been linked to patriarchy, as the structural condition that maintains
this form of inequality. The uneven but persistent inequalities of race and ethnicity
are related to the legacy of colonial domination of much of the world by predominantly

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS SOCIOLOGY? r 2)

European civilisation, and the establishment of empires of control. As discussed in
Chapter 5, the need for migration—itself a legacy of colonialism—is interwoven with
the systemic nature of ‘globalisation’.

As we shall see, while ‘system’ theory gives us a broad canvas on which to contex-
tualise so much of social life, often it can only partially explain individuals’ different
experiences of these ‘systems’. The gap between the macro and the micro is often
quite wide. To begin with, none of these systems occurs in isolation; rather, they are
overlaid and intersect to produce different social ‘shapes’. Second, the effect of these
systems on individuals may be uneven. While most people will accept the class posi-
tion they find themselves in, or adopt roles that conform to gender stereotypes, there
are also many exceptions. For example, some people refuse stereotypes, try to move
out of their class or, if they cannot do that, perhaps seek to challenge the class system
or join a social movement (such as the feminist movement).

This means that sociology cannot claim that all social phenomena are derived from
some system or other, but must also examine the more specific situations that form
persons and groups in the first place. Sociology looks at how a diversity of experience
goes into making up a society at large, not only at how social structures determine the
forms of experience and individuality that occur within it.

There is another crucial factor we have not yet mentioned—that of social change.
We can theorise the large picture, the individual picture and their interrelationship,
but we must also strive to understand how these realities change over time.

We live in an era in which it has become more challenging than ever to explain the
world. It is an era of unparalleled technical achievement, an incredibly vast and com-
plex global division of labour, and electronic assemblies on an unprecedented scale.
As discussed in Chapter 14, online social networking now connects over two billion
people, and mobile phones have outnumbered landlines as the preferred mode of
person-to-person connectivity.

The mobile phone has both shrunk and enlarged our world, from the very personal
settings in all of our smart apps and social media platforms, to allowing us to reach
out to a global stage of connection and ‘virtual travel’.

Through such media, our sense of connection is transforming our social setting
at a rate that is difficult to map. But at the same time, surrounding ourselves with
technological environments has led to a denaturing of the life-world. Cities have
become hothouses for this disconnection from nature as, in 2007, for the first time,
more of the world’s population had become residents of megacities than rural
areas.

What is perhaps the greatest challenge to arise from such change is few individuals
are aware of the way we are changing the earth’s climate at a rate 10 000 times natural
rates. While we live as creatures of technological micro-worlds and urban conven-
ience, the earth is hurtling towards dangerous climate change (see Chapter 15) that
may prove to be the ultimate limit to economic growth, to technological progress and
to human habitation of the planet itself.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


o& AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO3 Describe

the origins of

the sociological
imagination and
the different forms
it has taken

sociological
imagination

A kind of interpretive
imagination that does not
treat its subject matter like
objects in the natural world.
The sociological imagination
is anthropological, historical
and critical.

lm HOW DOES SOCIOLOGY STUDY? THE SOCIOLOGICAL IMAGINATION

Sociology has come a long way from the ideas of the 19th-century thinker Auguste
Comte. Comte founded the discipline as a science that would allow us to control his-
torical and social reality. His famous maxim Prevoir pour pouvoir, “To be able to
predict is to be able to control’, is the kind of view of knowledge that in many ways is
the antithesis of the sociological imagination as we know it today. Most importantly,
this is because sociologists today reject Comte’s habit of treating human beings as
though they were objects in the natural world (a view known as positivism). (For a
review, see Keat & Urry 1975.)

Sociology does not proceed with the analytical tools of the natural sciences but has
its own unique methodological approaches—what C. Wright Mills has called ‘the
sociological imagination’ (Mills 1983). The sociological imagination confronts the
fact that human societies and the individuals within them are transient, changing and
situational. The objects of study in sociology are not fixed, and their appearance
depends on the perspective of the observer. The latter feature of sociological inquiry
relates to the fact that sociologists are necessarily a part of the object that they study.
They necessarily interweave the significance of their own place within society with
their study of society in general. This is why, for Mills, a persistent reflexivity is
needed by sociologists in order to put into perspective the way they themselves have
been shaped by their society. To do this, sociologists must understand ‘what is hap-
pening in themselves as minute points of the intersections of biography and history
within society’ (Mills 1983: 14). This reflexivity requires the researcher to minimise
his or her own subjective ‘biases’, but it also provides an appreciation of history and
society at their most abstract. The sociological imagination ‘is the capacity to range
from the most impersonal and remote transformations to the most intimate features
of the human self—and to see the relations between these two’ (Mills 1983: 14).

Since Mills wrote his book, these local contexts of social life have been described
as the ‘life-world’ and the study of them as the ‘sociology of everyday life’. Alternatively,
the world of structural issues is often paired up with ‘systems theory’ or, more ambi-
tiously, ‘grand theory’. However, Mills’ persistent point is that to consider one with-
out the other amounts to a feeble avoidance of the sociological imagination.

As previously mentioned, the sociological imagination is distinguished from other
modes of inquiry because it studies individuals and the organisation of human expe-
rience, and not objects in the natural world. All manner of implications arise from
this, some of which we will cover throughout this book, including the dilemma of
whether or not it is appropriate to study human action independently of the mean-
ings that are attached to it.

This brings us to a second feature of sociological inquiry: the fact that it is interpre-
tive—or ‘hermeneutic —and not instrumental. It does not study meaning and action in
order to regulate or control it. That is, sociological inquiry is not constrained by instru-
mental goals. The idea of instrumental knowledge or rationality comes from another key
figure in sociological thought, Max Weber. He was the first to emphasise the distinction

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS SOCIOLOGY? r 2)

between instrumental and interpretive reason. Instrumental reason is anti-philosophical
in that it is preoccupied with achieving an objective according to an extremely tightly
defined set of criteria. When provided with a ‘given’, instrumental rationality will find
the best technical means of coming up with a solution. But do not ask instrumental
rationality to interpret anything. The sociological imagination, on the other hand, is not
guided by an end to knowledge. It addresses a world without constraint.

To say that the sociological imagination is interpretive is also to point out how it
tries to investigate beyond the outward appearance of social life. In doing so, most
sociology is wary of taking events and discourses at ‘face value’. Indeed, some soci-
ologists have aptly been described as ‘hermeneuts of suspicion’ who study the inner
systems within society.

From here the theses and questions about society begin rapidly to multiply. Where
does one society end and another begin? Where are the boundaries of these societies?
Are there any boundaries at all? In dividing societies into depth and surface, essence
and appearance, are we describing the actual form of society (‘ontology —that socie-
ties just are that way), or is this an epistemological move designed to allow us to think
we better understand the social world? On the other hand, what if there are inner laws
of social organisation determining everything we do, our life chances, how others
think of us and so on? Is it not then important to question what these laws are?

And what is the status of ‘essence’ and appearance? Does the familiar ‘appearance
of things’ hide the less familiar essence—the inner logics and laws of society?
Alternatively, does the essence of that society (for example, ‘rationality’, economics,
discourse) ‘produce’ the appearance? And finally, aren’t appearances convincing?
(Indeed, advertisers claim that appearances are everything.) And, if they are convinc-
ing, are they not as real as, or more real than, the presumed inner laws that lie at the
base of social organisation?

The idea that central organising ontologies are responsible for the diversity of
experience we encounter and live is difficult to prove. To investigate such structures,
sociology has recourse to a number of kinds of research. In the early 1980s, the British
sociologist Anthony Giddens proposed three kinds of sociological imagination that
enrich our understanding of social structure—historical, cultural and critical
(Giddens 1988).

Kinds of sociological imagination

As we have seen, modern sociology seldom engages in social forecasting. Karl Marx,
another key figure in the founding of sociology, provides a model case of this. For
example, despite the thousands of pages commentators have devoted to Marx’s
remarks prophesying the coming of a ‘communist’ society, the truth remains that of
the 61 volumes he authored (or co-authored with Engels), only 15 pages are devoted
to the possibility of a future communist state. Most of these pages were in political
pamphlets, written as journalism rather than social analysis. Marx’s Capital, for
example, merely analyses hundreds of years of European human history. However,

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


r 2) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

while predicting social futures may be neither possible nor desirable, it is nevertheless
possible and desirable to seek to understand the present.

The object of most sociological analysis is present-day society, the understanding
of what is going on around us. In assuming such a focus, sociology does, however,
share some commonalities with history and anthropology. The simplest way to
understand the society in which we live is to contrast it either in time or in kind.
History can teach us how what we take for granted today has not always been the case,
whereas anthropology can show us societies different from our own as a way of dem-
onstrating the contingency and idiosyncrasy of all societies.

For the sociological imagination to be reflexive, it is not enough to examine our
own society; we must try to look at other societies from radically different times and
places. It is only through defining what our own society is not that we can truly begin
to describe its character.

A good example of this we can take from Michel Foucault, one of the thinkers we
will be studying in this book. His methodological approach ofa ‘history of the present’
serves as an excellent illustration (and has been taken up by historians, sociologists
and cultural analysts alike). Foucault proposed that the purpose of history is to study
the past not as an end in itself, but as a way of reflecting on the present. That is to say,
traditional history imagines it is speaking about the past, but for Foucault, and in the
majority of cases, it is really superimposing the ‘discourses’ (ways of thinking and
speaking) of the present on the past. Foucault aims to reverse this logic. He says in his
book on disciplinary power, Discipline and Punish (1979: 26): ‘TI would like to write a
history of [the] prison, with all the political investments of the body that it gathers
together in its closed architecture. Why? Simply because I am interested in the past?
No, if one means by that writing the history of the past in terms of the present. Yes,
if one means writing the history of the present.’

Foucault captures, in a trice, the import of the historical domain of the sociological
imagination. His studies proceed by showing how strange and different past societies
and cultural formations have been, and in doing so disturb all that is comfortable in
categories by which we ‘live’ present-day social conditions. This is not to propose that
historical reality can be known ‘exactly as it was’; it is to avoid merely reinstating the
orthodoxies of contemporary thinking by applying them to other times and places.

Historical analysis is an indispensable aid in the task of explaining the present
conditions of contemporary society. Indeed, it was a method used by the founders
of sociology in the 19th century, whose strengths lie in contrasting traditional and
modern society.

In the 20th century the discipline of anthropology emerged as a way of exploring
the contrasts between different cultures. Anthropology is a discipline that is often
partnered with sociology in a university department, and it provides most of the
methodological basis for what is called “comparative sociology’. Comparative sociol-
ogy allows us to understand ‘other’ cultures in organised ways. Other places, other
ethnicities, other nations and other identities become conduits through which we can

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS SOCIOLOGY? r 2)

understand ‘ourselves’. Of course, here a great number of challenges and tensions are
introduced. Understanding difference can result in a worldly appreciation of culture,
but it can also be cause for insecurity in our identity. In a globalising world such a
confrontation may grow more acute, leading to xenophobic forms of nationalism
which appeal to an ethnocentric, one-dimensional world of homogeneous identity.
At the same time, the concern that some members of society may have about ‘others’
and otherness can dissipate as tourism, migration, commodity exchange and global
media conspire in the creation of what has been called a ‘global fugue state’ (Ostwald
2001). In such a period the behaviour of an ever-increasing proportion of the world’s
population becomes in a sense ‘touristic’, without even the need for travel. The global
in-mixing of culture may become generalised to the point where it becomes more
difficult to find an Other at all, as all culture is engaged by a law of the Same.

In the current period of cultural globalisation, therefore, the concept of culture is culture
a fraught one. As analysed in Chapter 13, the commonsense notion of culture as tied tnowlege, even
exclusively to ethnicity is problematised. As capitalism spreads over the globe it tends shared by members ofa
to destroy most senses of ethnic culture in its wake, and to replace these with the cul- {Shmery gender seat,
ture of capitalism itself. Industrialisation, informationalisation, consumerism and _ indigeneity, age, disability).
McDonaldisation are each ‘cultures’ of their own kind. They uproot so many of the
traditions necessary for many ethnic cultures to survive.

Capitalism first emerged in Europe and expanded in the waves of imperialism that
came out of Europe over hundreds of years. It is only in the 20th century that one of
the former colonies of Europe, the United States itself, assumed the centre of imperi-
alist power. The dominance of the US economy and political apparatus, as well as its
military and media imperialism in world affairs, has had a dramatic impact on every
region of the world. As discussed in Chapter 14, American serial dramas and soap
operas are played throughout Europe, Asia and the third world. At the same time,
approximately 75 per cent of World Wide Web traffic is sourced in the United States.
The influence of such concentrations of media dominance can be seen in the rapid
evaporation of the world’s languages. There are currently 6000 languages in the
world, which are disappearing at the rate of over 100 per year. It is estimated that by
2040 only 600 languages will remain, the most dominant of which will be English.

These trends in cultural globalisation compel us to reconsider the distinctiveness
of Australian culture, itself a legacy of European imperialism but at the same time
such a relatively young colony that its white population has barely developed an iden-
tity significant enough to justify feeling threatened by globalisation. If there are any
Australians who have been displaced, dislocated and uprooted from their traditional
identity, it is Australia’s Indigenous peoples (see Chapter 3). The confrontation
between black and white Australians, between a culture 40 000 years old and a colony
of Europeans and Asians who came to a New World, is much more profound than
that between 21st-century Australia and the rest of the globe.

The contrast between the colonised and colonisers is so wide as to make recon-
ciliation a seemingly unachievable task. For black and white to understand each other

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


2) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

ideology

Aset of socially determined
beliefs, values and opinions
that Marxists have suggested
function towards maintaining
and ‘naturalising’ the ‘status
quo’. Together with education,
legal and political apparatuses,
the media is one of the most
central institutions with a role
in the circulation of ‘dominant’
ideologies. In relation to media,
John B. Thompson (1990: 6)
has usefully defined ideology
as ‘meaning in the service

of power’.

requires an appreciation of cultural relativity—an attempt to understand the ‘other’
culture from the point of view of its own norms and values. Of course, such an exer-
cise is necessarily limited by the fact that ‘we’ (a ‘we’ that might be black or white) can
never quite ‘live’ what it means to belong to another culture; but at least we can be
sensitive to our differences and avoid imposing judgements that have no place in the
social world of others.

Perhaps the greatest insight that is arrived at in comparing one’s culture with that
of another is a realisation that social reality is not given, but is constructed in fragile
contingent and inessential ways. To recognise that other cultures might organise and
differentiate their societies in radically different ways is to perceive equally how the
content and structure of one’s own culture is arbitrary. It could be organised in an
infinite number of other ways. Usually, however, this sense of culture derives from
intersocietal comparison. Also we need to mention how cultural difference operates
within the same society.

In almost every society it is possible to discern dominant cultures and minority
cultures or ‘subcultures’. The dominant culture is usually identifiable by a dominant
ideology through which definitions of social reality are produced and naturalised. On
the other hand, by their mere existence, minority cultures often present a challenge to
the right of the dominant culture to dominate.

Studying minority cultures and subcultures is an extremely revealing exercise for
sociologists to undertake, because in the process the nature of the dominant culture
becomes ever more visible. This is particularly true in times of social conflict, when a
dominant order is threatened. Never is a structure more visible than when it is under
threat—whether we are speaking of a political, economic or social structure. New
trends in art, music and street culture implicitly comment on ‘mainstream’ culture
and its orthodoxy. Likewise, protests, strikes and demonstrations nearly always point
out injustices that reverse the way in which dominant ideologies naturalise inequality.

At the same time, as discussed in Chapter 9, mainstream culture often tries to label
different groups as deviant in order to reaffirm its power. The important point in both
these processes of differentiation, by minority or majority groups, is that the socio-
logical imagination cannot be content to make intersocietal or historical comparisons
only. The actions and attitudes of individuals are shaped also by interaction within
and between groups in the same society. For this reason, it is necessary to understand
the internal structure and composition of our own society.

The turn inward to our own social formation gives us the critical dimension of the
sociological imagination. In conducting critical analysis, sociologists must constantly
question their own assumptions and justify the relationship they establish between
evidence and conclusion. Here the question of the value of freedom comes up again.
When sociologists attempt to get at the ‘facts’, to what extent do their own value
judgements determine which ‘facts’ are selected and which are ignored? And what is
a fact in the first place? Do facts simply wait to be uncovered prior to our investigation
of them? What is the relationship between theories and facts?

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS SOCIOLOGY? r 2)

Recent work in the methodology of the social sciences has questioned the idea that
facts exist independently of theories, that there can be a theory-neutral experience of
the world. This view relies on a separation of ‘theories’, as the invention of thinking,
and facts, which are deemed to exist objectively. This latter view is a commonsense
one most of us hold, and is known as empiricism. Empiricism is a theoretical approach
and should be distinguished from ‘empirical’, which refers to the practice of research-
ing the world of social objects, common to all species of sociology. Empiricism often
entails a correspondence theory of truth, the idea that an investigation aims to mirror
the ‘real’ world with accurate description.

Paradoxically, empiricism is so prevalent in Western societies that it is rarely even
thought of as a theory. For this reason, ‘collecting facts’ seems to be a quite innocent
pre-theoretical exercise. However, critics of empiricism point out that the selection
and conceptualisation of facts is made possible only by a pre-theoretical understand-
ing that makes certain facts significant in the first place. Moreover, it is the theory—
an abstract way of differentiating the social world into elements and the relations
deemed to exist between these elements—that makes facts visible as facts.

This criticism of empiricism as the dominant ‘Western metaphysic’ has enormous
implications for studying social relationships. To the extent that such a criticism
holds sway, it is not valid for sociologists to propose that they have an ‘objective’
method. This is because, before any investigation begins, all sociologists employ some
kind of theoretical framework, explicitly or implicitly, whether or not they are aware
of it. Even if they reject the idea of using a theoretical perspective, they are ipso facto
subscribing to an empiricist approach.

This is not to say that there is no point in doing research any more because it will
always be ‘biased’ by a theory. Rather, it is important that the coherence of the theory
and the object it investigates be checked continuously. Theories may rapidly become
irrelevant as the field of investigation changes. Alternatively, what used to be regarded
as immutable ‘facts’ may be replaced, or disappear, as the theory itself becomes refined.

This does not mean that we ought to switch our theories continuously. Usually
they need to be modified, but a theory may hold up over a very long period of time.
For example, insofar as it can be demonstrated that Australia is a capitalist society, it
is entirely appropriate to engage theories of capitalism (Marx and Weber) that main-
tain a relevance long after their authors have died. If, however, Australia ceased to be
characterised by the central features of capitalism that were theorised over 100 years
ago, it would be dogmatic to seek to apply such a theory to that society.

Thus, the critical domain of the sociological imagination calls on us to maintain
this labour of checking, or checking back and forth, between the theories we are using
and the meanings, events, processes and structures in the social world.

The politics of the sociological imagination LO4 Explain how the

methods employed
To the above three kinds of imagination—the historical, the comparative and the agination hove,

critical—we can add a fourth domain—politics. If it is impossible to be theory- _ political implications

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


2) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

independent in one’s observation of the world, it goes without saying that every
sociological statement, no matter how modest, also involves a commitment to a cer-
tain world-view and serves a definite interest of individuals and groups within its field
of view. Consequently, sociology is a key discipline with an influence in practical
policy formulation and social reform.

A number of ways to conceptualise this convergence between ‘theory’ and ‘prac-
tice’ are outlined below.

Convergence between theory and practice

Sociology as an instrumental discipline

Some sociologists, particularly those coming out of the American tradition of
‘functionalism’, argue that sociology should not be an analysis of society but an analy-
sis for society. (For an appraisal, see Fay 1975.) Which is to say that sociology should
be used as a tool for repairing society's problems, to assist the state in the better regula-
tion of social functions and guarantee the smooth running of society (see Chapter 16).
Of course, what the ‘problems’ are varies within this tradition. Some argue that social
policies should tackle overcoming the deep inequalities that exist in so many nations
around the world, while others see these inequalities as immutable and think sociology
should focus on making the best of managing them, including their pathologies.

For example, in the United States, in the management of the most deprived mem-
bers of society, such as the 2.1 million persons incarcerated in prisons, there has lately
been a turn away from interpretive sociology to criminology as the most important
focus of sociology. At the same time the sociology of work, the family, health and devi-
ance are each at the forefront of the instrumental approach to ‘managing’ society.
Every year these disciplines are studied by over one million Americans at university.
Developed by the sociology of family tradition in the United States, some of the termi-
nology has even passed into everyday use, such as ‘dysfunctional’ (‘the dysfunctional
family’), a direct offspring of functionalist sociology. In Australia, the instrumental
approach to sociology has been historically more progressive, and has aimed at mend-
ing social ills and inequalities. In the late 1990s, however, government departments in
Australia became selective about using particular sociological policy formulations, in
policies such as ‘work for the dole’ and ‘mutual obligation’. Approaches such as ‘action
research’, a composite of networking, researching and educating organisations, have
been used and continue to be used by government departments to improve their qual-
ity and performance. However, this latter kind of research, credentialled as ‘sensitive
social science’ in the United States and used widely within the Australian state, attends
to the internal dynamics of an organisational culture, not to how that organisation
relates to society in general or to wider inequalities and changes.

Sociology as permanent critique

Partly as a reaction to the excessive instrumentalisation of sociology during the 20th
century, a recent addition to sociological critique is postmodern sociology. It seeks to

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS SOCIOLOGY? r 2)

preserve a sense of the ‘critique of society’ and has been very critical of any attempts
to appropriate sociology as a handbook for ‘engineering’ society. Postmodern sociol-
ogy, which has been influenced most profoundly by 20th-century continental intel-
lectual traditions (especially the French traditions, which have been imported as
‘postmodern’ in the United States and elsewhere, although French sociologists often
reject the term being applied to them: see Chapter 16), has expressed immense indig-
nity and contempt for any form of knowledge that proposes to ‘speak for others’
(Foucault & Deleuze 1977: 209).

Such contempt is understandable in the context of French society, which is par-
ticularly afflicted by technocratic procedures. But in nearly all Western societies,
sociologists have tried to grapple with instrumental and ‘governmental’ forms of dis-
ciplinary power. For many postmodernists the critique has extended to education
(J.F. Lyotard), the media (J. Baudrillard), the family (J. Donzelot), and psychology and
sociology itself as ‘normalising’ disciplines (M. Foucault). For Foucault, the human
sciences and European ‘humanism’—a particular style of subjectivity in which indi-
viduals police their own behaviour—have colluded in the normalisation, surveillance
and discipline of populations in Western societies for over a century.

Against such a movement, Foucault advances what he has called an ‘ethos of perma-
nent critique’ (Foucault 1984: 42). Foucault’s method is never aimed at yielding fixed
truths but ‘demands relentless erudition’ (Foucault 1977: 140). Foucault views this
ethos as a valuable legacy of the Enlightenment (which is in tension with other elements
that propose triumphal kinds of knowledge). Foucault argues that any critique of
present-day societies is necessarily limited: “The critique of what we are is at one and
the same time the historical analysis of the limits that are imposed on us and an exper-
iment with the possibility of going beyond them’ (1984: 50). We must constantly ques-
tion historical limits in order to separate ‘what is given to us as universal, necessary,
obligatory’ in a particular period from ‘what place is occupied by whatever is singular,
contingent and the product of arbitrary constraints’ (Foucault 1984: 50). It is then pos-
sible to assess ‘what limits knowledge has to renounce transgressing’, not in order to
develop an instrumental theory as a tool of control but to resist that which confronts us
as obligatory. There is no point in resisting what is arbitrary, but it may easily be con-
fused with the universal unless we permanently question our historical situation.

Sociology and social reproduction

All sociologists have affinities with postmodern sociological views about the role of
criticism, to some degree. Many sociologists see their role as providing critique and
reflection. Given how few areas of capitalist culture provide for such an activity, it is
important that sociology and its collegial disciplines in the social sciences maintain
the practice of criticism. At the same time, some sociologists view ‘postmodern’ soci-
ology as an overreaction to the contemporary state and organisational bureaucracies.
Complex societies are capable of all kinds of crises and obviously need to be admin-
istered and governed in order to avoid social disorder. Postmodern sociologists have

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


2) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

been accused of equating a particular characteristic of modernity—state control—
with society in general. In this they develop post-social accounts of the world that
refuse to be reduced to any kind of program that might lend itself to large-scale social
reform. Often this is expressed as theoretical individualism—what has been described
as ‘an ethic of constant disengagement from constituted forms of experience’
(Rajchman 1985: 37). It is well to have ‘indignity for speaking for others’ in the face
of bureaucratic intellectuals prescribing for others their social needs, but the question
of whether it is only bureaucrats and their peculiar kind of rationalism who are doing
this ‘speaking’ remains.

Then there is the question of structure, and of the fact that structures may also
prescribe for us our identity, our opportunities and our value systems. How do we
know what these structures are unless we inquire into them? And if we do not know
what they are, how do we know what needs to be changed and how these changes can
be achieved? These questions are all endemic to what has become known in sociology
as the structure versus agency debate, where ‘structure’ refers to the social determina-
tions that antedate the individual and ‘agency’ denotes the power individuals have in
structured contexts.

More important even than structure, however, is how such structures are repro-
duced over time. How is it that the positions that individuals occupy in a structure
might change, yet the structure itself retains the same form from day to day, year to
year, decade to decade? One argument that emerges here is that to understand how a
structure is reproduced (for example, a class structure or patriarchal structure) is to
understand its innermost workings.

This has led some sociologists, such as Pierre Bourdieu (1930-2002), to focus on
practice as a starting point for understanding social life (see Bourdieu 1987: 1-30).
Bourdieu argues that sociologists cannot understand structures merely theoretically.
Rather, in understanding the social practices that both reproduce and threaten social
structures we can begin to unravel them. To go back to our discussion of ontology, it
is not enough to understand ‘what exists’ in isolation; we have to understand what is
possible as a path to what exists. Any theory that provides this account is, ipso facto,
an adequate theory of the reproduction of these practices and, more importantly, of
their non-reproduction. When it is known by experience which practices threaten
prevailing social structures to the point where they would cease to be structures, then

social change those structures become more tangible. The theory that results is valid to an extent: if
The process of historical jt guides our actions towards social change, it succeeds in practically transforming

such change nay ene tom the social reality it addresses.
‘incremental’ and gradual to The focus of social and cultural reproduction that characterises Bourdieu’s per-

revolutionary and abrupt. . . to. . . . . .

The most important areasot Spective is an attempt to overcome the distinction between subjective and objective
Change etn ed by eent kinds of knowledge. Both are important forms of knowledge in unravelling the prob-
sociologists are from industrial lem of social reproduction. Theories need to be generated from empirical research,
t0"postindustral society, fom — ut they also need to be tested in practice for us to be reassured of their validity. The

Modern to postmodern, and
from ‘middle’ to ‘late’ capitalism. direction of that practice becomes a key question here. Whether this practice should

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS SOCIOLOGY? r 2)

be oriented towards organisation reform, policy formulation, social reform, political
protest or an entire social revolution is a matter for social actors to determine.

The importance of comparing perspectives

Questions about the society in which we live—its future, our roles and responsibilities
in it, the way it functions and changes—are questions that we confront in our public
and inner lives. As the world becomes integrated through the expanding communica-
tion revolution, we live in an increasingly multicultural and multidimensional envi-
ronment. Understanding this complexification of the life-world has become an
urgent task. Sociology gives us powerful perspectives through which to view the
present and to examine critically so-called commonsense explanations of social inter-
action and social structures.

Whether we are concerned with social change (no matter how modest) or merely
understanding the society we live in, sociology offers a vast range of perspectives by
which to achieve these aims. Just as we can compare different societies to gain knowl-
edge of our own, it is important that we learn to compare the different perspectives
available to sociology, as a way of establishing the coherence of our analysis of the
field we are investigating.

CONCLUSION

Throughout this book you will be introduced to a range of sociological perspectives, and encounter systems
of thought ranging from the 19th-century ‘founders’ of the discipline to recent contemporary theoretical
movements, such as post-structuralism, postmodernity and deconstruction. To ‘know thy perspectives’ and be

able to ground any given text in one or more of the perspectives that sociology employs is the most valuable
aid in steering your way through this very broad discipline. For example, to be able to link a particular thinker

to one or more perspectives helps clarify why that thinker presents his or her field of inquiry in a certain way.
It also enables the scholar to make informed judgements of whether the approach employed is appropriate or
instructive. Matching up a field of inquiry with a sociological perspective that can engage with itis a difficult
task, and in doing so as researchers we invariably modify our own theoretical positions and premises.

® @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ © @ 6 6 © 6 6 GC 6 6 6 6 6 6 OC eC 6 ee 6 eC ee 6 6 eC ee

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

1. What is the link between ontology and epistemology in defining the field of

sociology? (LO1)

2. Is ‘inequality’ necessary? How is it linked to social reproduction and social change? (LO2)

3. Which of the different kinds of sociological imagination are useful in the 21st century? (LO3)
What are the main topics of social change that have altered the nature of sociological
inquiry? (LO4)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


16 ( SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Berger, P. (1976) Invitation to Sociology, Harmondsworth, UK, Pelican.

Bourdieu, P. (1987) Outline of a Theory of Practice, trans. R. Nice, New York, Cambridge University Press.

Fay, B. (1975) Social Theory and Political Practice, London, George Allen & Unwin.

Foucault, M. (1977) ‘Nietzsche, Genealogy, History’, in D.F. Bouchard (ed.), Language, Counter-Memory, Practice,
Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, pp. 139-64.

Foucault, M. (1979) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. A. Sheridan, New York, Vintage Books.

Foucault, M. (1984) ‘What is Enlightenment?’, in P. Rabinow (ed.), The Foucault Reader, New York, Pantheon,
pp. 32-50.

Foucault, M. & Deleuze, G. (1977) ‘Intellectuals and Power’, in D.F. Bouchard (ed.), Language, Counter-Memory,
Practice, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, pp. 205-17.

Giddens, A. (1988) Sociology: A Brief but Critical Introduction, 2nd edn, London, Macmillan.

Keat, R. & Urry, J. (1975) Social Theory as Science, London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Mills, C.W. (1983) The Sociological Imagination, London, Pelican.

Ostwald, M. (2001) ‘Identity Tourism’, in D. Holmes (ed.), Virtual Globalisation: Virtual Spaces/Tourist Spaces,
London, Routledge, pp. 192-204.

Rajchman, J. (1985) Michel Foucault: The Freedom of Philosophy, New York, Columbia University Press.

Thompson, J.B. (1990) Ideology and Modern Culture, Cambridge, Polity.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2

CLASS

\PTER OUTLINE

This chapter elaborates the discussion of inequality already outlined by investigating the
fundamental concept of ‘class.

The empirical research on the existence of class in Australia is examined and interpreted.
Doing so entails looking at wealth and income inequalities and how they have changed
over time. We discover that, by a range of indexes, this inequality has increased over the
past few decades.

The main perspectives for examining patterned inequality—the Marxist and the Weberian
accounts of class—are introduced and compared.

The chapter differentiates and briefly examines the four classes that appear most often in
the literature: the ruling or upper class, middle class, working class and underclass.

Finally, consideration is given as to whether poverty in Australia can be examined
separately from class analysis.

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Analyse the relationship between wealth and
income inequality

LO2 Describe the distinction between Marx's and
Weber's analysis of class

LO3 Distinguish between different classes in
Australian society and the functions they
perform

LO4 Explain the controversies surrounding the
‘poverty wars’

LO5 Analyse how sociologists measure inequalities

ht © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e



@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

In outward form, or as far as most ordinary people know or care, Australia is the most
egalitarian of countries, untroubled by obvious class distinctions, caste or communal
domination, the tensions of racism and the horrors of autocracy ... The spirit of
fraternalism permeates the nation ... Ordinary people are not concerned with the rich
or the highly educated. What they want they can usually get—a house, a car, oysters,
suntans, cans of asparagus, lobsters, seaside holidays, golf, tennis, fishing, gardening ...
Australia has one of the highest per capita national incomes in the world ... there is
the largest rate of home ownership in the world; there are more savings accounts than
people ... Not only are very rich or very poor people rare; the average income is not a
simple average, it is also close to the typical income.

(Horne [1964] 1967: 19-21)

This description of 1960s Australian society as a carefree consumer paradise,
from Donald Horne’s The Lucky Country was written from the comfort of a very
stable period of economic growth. It was easy to extol the virtues of liberal
democracy in terms of its inclusion of all groups and all classes in the political
process.

In 2013, another commentator, Nick Cater, echoed Horne in his book, The Lucky
Culture, praising Australia for its ‘overriding principle’ of a ‘fair go’, which he claimed
pervades Australian social relations. He denied that there were any ‘institutional
barriers’ limiting a person’s ability to get ahead (2013: 23). Cater argued that the only
flaw in this fair-go paradise was that since Horne’s time an expanding tertiary-
educated elite had come to consider itself culturally superior to ordinary Australians
(2013: 24). This aspiration to get ‘above your station’ was ‘un-Australian’, Cater
believed, reinforcing the argument that Australia remained fundamentally egalitarian
in its character.

One of the assets of the sociological imagination is that it endeavours to empiri-
cally test these types of claims and the extent to which they hold over time. This
chapter therefore explores the basis of class inequality in Australia. It describes how
sociologists have measured inequality and how the dynamic nature of capitalism
presents scope for competing perspectives on the nature of class inequality, all of
which qualify claims that Australia is a classless society.

Marxist sociologists would suggest that Horne and Cater only captured the appear-
ance of a classless society, rather than the class realities that underpin capitalist
Australia. This is because, as Kuhn and O’Lincoln (1996: 145) argue: ‘Capitalism is
the first class system in history that pretends not to be one.’ For this reason, it is diffi-
cult to see classes as easily as other kinds of social distinction. Weberians, for instance,
would emphasise the importance of ‘status’ in ordering Australian society. Whether
we look at the statistics on inequality in Australia or engage in the theoretical explana-
tions of how these inequalities are reproduced, sociology is able to provide insights
into class structure.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2 CLASS @®

lM MEASURING INEQUALITY LO1 Analyse the

OOOO relationship between
Opinion polls consistently reveal the relevancy of Horne’s and Cater’s claims that wealth and income

Australians consider a ‘fair go’ to be a fundamental Australian value (see Herscovitch "°02""Y
2013: 3-4). Furthermore, the idea that Australia is a class-based society is denied

daily by the popular press and politicians of many persuasions. Whenever media-
generated nationalistic sentiment is expressed, usually around a sporting event or on
Australia Day, the familiar claim is paraded that Australia is an egalitarian society,
characterised by ‘mateship’ and a ‘fair go’ (see Thompson 1994; Fiske, Turner &

Hodge 1987).

However, the rhetoric of equality becomes more problematic when basic measures
of inequality in Australian society are considered. In what follows, various dimen-
sions of inequality in Australia are presented—by wealth and income—before outlining
various theories that have been advanced to explain such inequality.

Wealth: Who owns what?

Calculating wealth is not an easy task. It is usually achieved by modelling the most
reliable measures of individuals’ or households’ composition of assets including cash,
life insurance and trusts, property holdings, equities, trusts and superannuation, as
well as non-financial assets such as cars and collectibles (see Finlay 2013).
The first serious investigation into the ownership of wealth in Australia occurred
in 1915; in it, the Commonwealth statistician showed wealth differentials to be much
more significant than income differentials. Just 1 per cent of male adults owned
30 per cent of the national wealth, and the elite 5 per cent owned 66 per cent of this
wealth (Wheelwright 1993: 46). These extremes narrowed significantly between 1915
and 1960 but began climbing again from the 1960s onwards (Western 1983;
Baekgaard 1998).
Recent statistics (see Table 2.1) drawing on data collected by the Melbourne
Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research, University of Melbourne, known
as the HILDA (Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia) surveys
(Wilkins 2013; see also RBA 2009 and Marks et al. 2005) found that while net house-
hold worth increased for all quintiles of the population between 2002 and 2010, the quintile
distribution of wealth remained highly unequal. The top 1 per cent of households by *?¢#down ofthe population
on an ordinal scale from the
2012 increased their wealth to an average $5.2 million (an increase of 45 per cent since _ towestto the highest 20 per
2002), and the bottom 10 per cent of households increased their average wealth to ¢™unnie secant ants
$9538 (an increase of 116 per cent). This suggests that wealth inequality decreased these are known as ‘deciles’
between 2002 and 2010, mainly because the wealthiest are more likely to hold wealth
in shares, which were hit harder than property and superannuation in the aftermath
of the 2008 global financial crisis (Finlay 2013). Despite this, there remains a yawning
gap between the least and the most wealthy in Australia. Using another data source,
Stilwell and Primrose (2009) estimated that the top one-fifth of households on average
own 40 times as much wealth as the poorest fifth.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Distribution of household net wealth across all households (December 2010 prices)

CHANGE FROM
2002 2006 2010 2002 TO 2010

AVERAGE NET WEALTH ($)

Mean 495 496 686 641 683 694 38.0%
Median 266 025 363 590 399'353 50.1%

NET WEALTH AT DIFFERENT POINTS OF THE DISTRIBUTION ($)

Bottom 10% 4397 7 767 9 538 116.9%
Bottom 25% 62 818 84 374 93/175 48.3%
Top 25% 621 274 791 922 851 425 37.0%
Top 10% 1139 417 1 508 671 1551 743 36.2%
Top 5% 1 692 260 2 268 594 2 303 266 36.1%
Top 1% 3 561 661 5 090 818 5 183 353 45.5%

TABLE 2.1 Source: Wilkins (2013: 74), Table 13.1, first and second panel. Reproduced under Creative Commons CC-BY
Attribution 3.0 licence. © Commonwealth of Australia 2013.

Income: Who gets what?

Figure 2.1 presents a set of Lorenz curves, a measurement of inequality where the
diagonal line represents perfect equality (in other words, any percentage of the popu-
lation receives its proportionate share). As the curve moves further away from this
straight line, this represents greater inequality. What these 2012 Australian Lorenz
curves reveal is that wealth is more unequally distributed than income. This finding
has been consistent over time and across countries.

DES 5s") Wealth and income distribution in Australia, 2012

100

—— Equal distribution

—— Income

== Wealth

Cumulative share of wealth or income (%) B

20 T T T T
(0) 20 40 60 80 100
Cumulative share of households

Source: Finlay, R. (2013: 3) <www.rba.gov.au/publications/bulletin/2012/mar/pdf/bu-0312-3.pdf>. © Reserve Bank of
Australia. All rights reserved.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2 CLASS @®

Income-distribution surveys have been conducted at regular intervals since 1969
(Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics, CBCS 1973), and a number of stud-
ies have attempted to estimate distribution in the first two-thirds of the 20th century
(Jones 1975; McLean & Richardson 1986; Saunders 1993). In concordance with pat-
terns of wealth distribution, the longitudinal account of patterns between 1915 and
the turn of the 21st century indicated that income inequality declined between 1915
and the 1960s, with the greatest period of income equalisation occurring after the
1930s Depression. A further equalisation occurred between the late 1960s and the
early 1980s (Saunders 2001). Since that time, income inequality has increased consist-
ently, but not as acutely as inequalities in wealth. Table 2.2 shows that in 1994/95 the
lowest-income quintile received only 7.9 per cent of income, whereas the highest
quintile received 37.8 per cent. In 2007/08, these figures had declined to 7.6 per cent
for the lowest quintile and increased for the highest quintile to 39.4 per cent.

Percentage income share for income quintiles, 1994-2008

INCOME INEQUALITY, 1994/95 AND 2007/08

2007/08
(EXCLUDING NEW

INCOME SHARE 1994/95 COVERAGE ADJUSTMENTS)
% %

Lowest quintile 7.9 7.6

Second quintile 12.8 12.7

Third quintile 17.7 174

Fourth quintile 23.7 22:9)

Highest quintile 37.8 39.4

TABLE 2.2 Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009) Household Income and Income Distribution, 2007-08,
Cat. No, 6523.0, Canberra, AGPS. © Commonwealth of Australia.

International comparison

While the statistics examined in this chapter so far suggest income and wealth
inequality within Australia, one of the principal claims made by commentators
such as Cater is that Australia is comparatively more egalitarian than other coun-
tries. However, a recent study by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) questioned this assertion. It examined the Gini coefficient Gini coefficient
of 35 of the world’s wealthiest countries in the late 2000s (see Figure 2.2). Of the colt whee epee
35 countries, Australia was the ninth most unequal, although this level of inequality perfectequaiity and1
was similar to most English-speaking countries. Australia was slightly more equal "ses sue inequality.
than the United States and the United Kingdom, but less equal than Canada and
New Zealand (Greenville, Pobke & Rogers 2013: 100-1).
Throughout the OECD countries in general, there has been a tendency for income
inequality to grow over the past 20 years. For example, while the top 10 per cent of
wage earners throughout the OECD achieved average income growth of 1.9 per cent,
the bottom 10 per cent achieved 1.3 per cent growth. In Australia, the corresponding

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO2 Describe the
distinction between
Marx's and Weber's
analysis of class

class

Refers to either a ‘classification’
of populations according to
wealth and income, or toa
generative power relationship,
whereby the section of society
that produces wealth is ruled
over by another section that
owns the means of generating
the wealth.

eS 484) Household Gini coefficients of selected OECD countries, late 2000s

0.50
0.45 +
0.40 +
0.35 4
0.30 4
0.25 4
0.20 4
On SiS)
0.10 4

Source: Greenville, J., Pobke, C. & Rogers, N. (2013), ‘Trends in the Distribution of Income in Australia’, Productivity Commission
Staff Working Paper, March, Melbourne, Productivity Commission, Figure 4.1, p. 101.

growth rates were 4.5 per cent and 3 per cent (Greenville, Pobke & Rogers 2013:
102-4). While the ratio between the OECD average and the Australian average is
similar, the stronger growth rates in Australia resulted in greater differences of wage
levels between the top and bottom 10 per cent. This relationship between relative
income growth and inequality will be explored later in the chapter in the context of

recent ‘poverty wars’.

Mi THEORIES OF CLASS

A range of perspectives explaining the existence of class and class inequality in

Australia has been put forward by sociologists. Each of these perspectives derives
from one or other ‘classical’ view of class that can be traced to foundational sociolo-
gies of the 19th century. The prominent theories that have been applied to Australian
society are Marxist and Weberian views. Before examining their application to

Australia, these perspectives will be described in more detail.

Marxist theories of class

Marx’s account of capitalist society is an appropriate launching place for a discussion
of the concept of class, because it introduced the first systemic theory of class to the

social sciences.

Marxist theories of class in Australian society emphasise the fact that Australia is
a capitalist society. For Marxists, the idiosyncrasies of Australian ‘culture’ observed by
commentators such as Horne and Cater are important, but they are overshadowed by
the dynamics of capitalism—in particular, the way it throws every human being into
ceaseless competition between worker and worker, worker and capitalist, and capi-

talist and capitalist.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2 CLASS @®

The theory of class was integral to Marx’s entire vision of historical development
(see Chapter 16). For Marx, class is not simply a way of classifying a population but
defines the operation of capitalist society. Capitalism produces and thrives on class
divisions. For example, for Marxists unemployment is not a defect of capitalist society:
rather, it allows the ruling class to increase its wealth relative to the working class
through encouraging competition between workers.

For Marx, class is defined according to the ownership of the means of production.
Capitalist relations of production are characterised by a complete separation of the pro-
ducers (working class) from the means of production. The class that owns the means
of production, the bourgeoisie, is defined by its ownership of capital, forms of value—
factories, machinery, land, rented properties and invested finance—that are used to
accumulate more wealth. The ownership of the means of industrial production—the
control over the production of subsistence and consumer goods—is the single most
important kind of capital in both national and international contexts. All wealth is
ultimately bound up with the circulation of this kind of capital. Renting property and
investment are other longstanding forms of profit making. The activities of the petit
bourgeoisie (or small businesses), which are basically to buy cheap and sell dear, or to
take a commission in the sale of property, merely continue pre-industrial practices of
trade. These subsidiary movements of capital were relatively unimportant for Marx in
the analysis of classes under capitalism.

As a class, capitalists have a near-total monopoly over the ownership and organisa-
tion of the means of production, while all the workers possess is their labour power,
which they must sell on the market as a commodity for wages. The relation between
an individual capitalist and an individual worker is therefore an exchange relation
determined by the market, as either are free to look elsewhere for a better exchange.
When capitalist and worker meet in the marketplace, what appears to happen is a
mutual exchange, a fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work. However, Marx’s economic
theory sets out to show that the inherent inequality of this exchange lies in the fact
that capitalists are able to make profits simply by virtue of organising production, and
legally owning the means of production even though the workers actually generate
this profit through their labour. For Marx, labour is the source of capitalist wealth,
and in general it is through the activity of labour that economic value is created.
However, workers are separated from the ownership and control of the wealth that is
created by their work.

Three important elements of Marx’s systemic approach to class are discussed
below: the theory of surplus value; the subsistence wage and the reserve army of
labour; and the concept of the middle class.

The theory of surplus value

Marx stresses that workers are free to sell their labour power, but have to sell it in order
to live. In selling their labour power, workers give up their claims to the products they
make, which are available on the market for exchange. Marx’s economic argument is

working class

The class under capitalism that
lives through selling its labour
on the market. Marx argued
that in producing value greater
than that of its own labour cost,
the working class generates
profit for the owning class. This
relationship between the
working class and the owning
class is the fundamental class
division under capitalism and
always remains inherently
antagonistic.

bourgeoisie

Under capitalism, the
bourgeoisie is the ruling class
and is also described as the
capitalist class. It owns the
principal means of production
and purchases the labour power
of the working class with the
aim of making a profit.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

that the workers always receive less in wages than the value of the commodities they
produce. Workers consume only a portion of these products, which they can buy back
in the market with the wage they receive for their labour power. Importantly, the inequity
that is produced in this relationship occurs only at the point of production, not consump-
tion. According to Marx, no amount of redistributive taxation can address the fact that
the reproduction of capitalism depends on the exploitation of workers, in which the
workers produce the wealth for those who rule over them.

In Marx’s theory of surplus value, the difference between the exchange value of the
worker’s labour and its use value to the capitalist who buys it represents surplus value.
The ratio of unpaid or surplus labour time to necessary labour time is the rate of
exploitation. The capitalist is forced to calculate this realisation of value (and conse-
quently is forced to exploit) in order to remain competitive against other capitalists.
To generate profit, the capitalist expects to use the labour power that is bought to
produce a quantity of commodities whose exchange value (appearing as a monetary
price) is expected to be greater than the cost of production.

Historically, capitalists have tried a range of measures to extract the maximum
surplus value from workers. These include:

™ extending the working day (a measure that was countered by the union movement's
struggle for an eight-hour day: in Australia, the working week across most indus-
tries has dropped from 48 hours as standard in 1901 to 44 hours by 1927 to the
current 37.5 hours. However, since the mid-1990s, following the casualisation of
many industries, individual hours have become less regulated)

™ speeding up the pace of work (which may become a health and safety issue)

@ dividing labour in increasingly detailed ways to achieve economies of scale (known
as Taylorism and initiated by Henry Ford to produce motor vehicles in the United
States in the early 20th century—see Chapter 10)

™@ introducing more and more machinery, which de-skills the worker, produces more
unemployment and drives down wages (machines are the products of the past
labours of workers, even past generations of workers)

™ attempting to de-unionise a workforce, which weakens the power of collective
labour and extracts more corporate loyalty and hard work from workers.

The subsistence wage and the reserve army of labour

Marx believed that there was a general tendency under capitalism for the value of the
worker’s labour power to be driven towards a value necessary to keep the worker at
subsistence level, or ‘the subsistence wage’ (1976: 274). Capitalists constantly pressure
legislators to set low rates for wages across the entire spectrum of the labour market.
Politicians and representatives of the capitalist state apparatus who identify politically
with the capitalist class will assist them in achieving this. They might also attempt to
break union power in various ways in order to weaken the position of workers. In
contrast, the union movement and pro-worker political parties will attempt to set
minimum standards above the subsistence level (see Chapter 10).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2 CLASS @®

However, these struggles between the representatives of capital and of labour does
not alter the fact that the exchange relation at the centre of the capitalist mode of
production is unequal; it merely alters the rate of exploitation. The fact of exploitation
is not a moral concern for Marx, but merely an economic term used to describe the
form of power capitalists have over workers.

Pro-capitalist politicians speak of new production facilities, mines and other
investment in Australia in openly benevolent terms: corporations should be thanked
for providing jobs as though this were an act of welfare. In fact, what induces capital-
ists to buy each worker’s labour power is the search for higher rates of profit, and this
holds whether workers are producing consumer goods or services (whether in a shoe
factory, a call centre, a coal mine or a fast-food restaurant). If profitable conditions no
longer prevail, capitalists either terminate production and reinvest in a more profit-
able area of activity, or move operations elsewhere to a location where they do. The
mere threat by capitalists to move location to cheaper places can also depress the level
of workers’ wages.

Employers also take advantage of unemployment to increase their power over
workers. Unemployment leads to the creation of what Marx calls a ‘reserve army of
labour’, which affects the employed workers by increasing competition for jobs and
weakening their bargaining power for wage rises and better conditions.

However, this struggle between capitalists and workers leads to one of the key
contradictions in the capitalist system. If capitalists are unable to find new markets in
which to sell their products, then the system suffers a crisis of ‘overproduction’, which
sends it into recession. Capitalists do have recourse to remedying this situation as
long as they successfully identify new markets for their goods as well as cheaper
sources of labour. This remedy has been a major driving force behind economic
globalisation (see Chapters 11 and 13).

The growth of the middle class

Marx claimed that the basic antagonism at the heart of capitalism was class polarisa-

tion, thrusting the vast mass of individuals into the working class and concentrating

capital in the hands of a small elite. In the light of the extraordinary resilience of

capitalism, many modifications have been made to Marx’s theory over the years.

Explanations included the significance of women’s unpaid domestic labour in repro-

ducing capitalism, technological and organisational changes to the labour process, the

establishment of arbitration in industrial relations systems (see Chapter 10), the rise

of the technocratic state and managerialism, and the decline of class consciousness. _ class consciousness

One major development that must be discussed here is the growth of a very sizeable meas dss secordingto

middle class in the wealthier capitalist nations. ‘objective’ markers, such as
Whether the class polarisation Marx described in the 19th century would unfold at Oy nonievewterown

solely national levels rather than a global level was a point disputed by Marxists  dassand the class of othersis

throughout the 20th century. Marx’s prediction of polarisation does appear more nts important

aspect of class.
accurate at a global level. The United States, whose dominance we noted in Chapter 1,

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

embourgeoisement
Refers to the entry of the
traditional working class into
affluent middle-class
occupations, the decline of class
consciousness within the
working class and their
adoption of middle-class values.
The decline in union
membership in advanced
capitalist countries is one
indicator of this, but so is the
rise of individualism, the belief
that one’s goals are achievable
through individual effort.

represents less than 6 per cent of the world’s population but consumes nearly 36 per
cent of the world’s resources. This indicates that inequality also exists at global levels
(see Chapter 13).

What Marx did not predict was the extent to which the most advanced nations
would develop very large middle classes, who would live, to a large degree, off
cheaper labour from poorer nations with which trade was conducted. The higher
average standards of living enjoyed by first-world consumers are partly a result of an
unequal trade relationship with the third world where labour is very cheap (see
Chapter 13).

For example, a pair of running shoes made in Indonesia that might sell in Australia
for $200 is equivalent to one-third of an average Australian worker’s weekly income,
but would take four months’ wages to buy for an Indonesian factory worker. The col-
lective struggles for improvements in working conditions and wages, and the fact that
spending in real terms has risen substantially over the past 100 years in Australia,
have made possible a sizeable section of middle-class consumers.

Figure 2.3 shows how, between the mid-1940s and the beginning of the 21st
century, price-adjusted consumption increased in Australia on average by about
2.5 per cent each year, equivalent to a doubling of its value about every 28 years. This
is broadly consistent with United Nations Human Development statistics, which
show that between 1980 and 2008, household final consumption expenditure per
capita increased from $10 776 to $18 378. (For an explanation of standardised inter-
national dollars, see United Nations Development Program, UNDP 2010.)

From the Marxist perspective, this substantial increase in average household con-
sumption suggests that a large group of Australians is living well beyond a subsistence
wage—the so-called ‘embourgeoisement’ of large sections of the working class.
Paradoxically, the objective indicators of wealth and income inequality observed ear-
lier in this chapter have corresponded with improvements in material wellbeing for
large sections of middle- and working-class Australians. This paradox will be explored
in the final section in reference to ‘poverty wars’.

im TeN) 3 45<)) Household final consumption expenditure per capita, 1901-2001

$000
- 20

I T T T T T T T T T 1
1901 1911 1921 1931 1941 1951 1961 1971 1981 1991 2001

Source: Saunders, P. (2001) ‘income and Welfare Centenary Article—Household Income and its Distribution’, Year Book
Australia, 2001, <www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/>. © Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2 CLASS @®

Weber’s account of class and social stratification

The most comprehensive non-Marxist theory of class was advanced by Max Weber
(see Chapter 16). Weber agreed with Marx’s view of economic class, but advanced economic class
further indicators that were also important in determining an individual’s social RDimolran
position and power. The key differences between Marx and Weber derive from _ and income.
their different methodologies. Marx is interested in the reproduction of capitalism
as a whole (his ‘nomothetic’ system—see Chapter 16) and then looks at how indi-
viduals are distributed within this system. In contrast, Weber conceived a picture
of class from individual and social particularities (the ‘ideographic’ method—see
Chapter 16). For this reason, Weber’s account of class is much more classificatory,
and less structuralist (seeing the observable social world as the phenomenon of an
inner dynamic).
Another key difference between Marx and Weber is that whereas for Marx the
class position of any individual is ultimately tied to the function they perform in the
production process, for Weber it is also tied to the sphere of consumption and an
individual’s labour-market status. Weber explores a range of visible differentials that
determine social stratification, including economic class, social status and political

power (or party).

Economic class

Like Marx, Weber defined class economically, but in such a way that it could be
broken down into more observable units. For Weber, Marx’s two-class model
involving worker and capitalist is too general to be meaningful. Economic class does
not hinge solely on the ownership of productive capital but includes inherited prop-
erty, which may also be unproductive. For example, primogeniture (inheritance)
often, after several generations, earns the label of ‘old money’, as opposed to rising
capitalist groups or families known as the nouveau riche. In Australia, examples of
‘old money’ include the Baillieu or the Fairfax families, while the nouveau riche
includes Lindsay Fox, Frank Lowy and Eddie McGuire. The fact that the older
wealthy dynasties may no longer be investing in contemporary industry, and may
have to sell off some of their property to pay for their upkeep, does not detract from
their establishment status.

Weber also proposes that the possession of certain skills commands respect and
income in ways that wealth alone cannot. For this reason, for Weber, ‘the term class
refers to any group of people ... who have the same typical chance for a supply of
goods, external living conditions and personal life experiences’ according to their
ability to ‘dispose of goods or skills for the sake of income’ (Gerth & Mills 1977: 181).

Weber distinguished between four economic classes:

m@ the propertied class

@ the intelligentsia (the administrative and managerial classes)
@ the traditional petit bourgeoisie

m@ the working class.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

status

Symbolic distinctions between
groups that can be powerful
forces of inclusion and exclusion
and have real effects on
people’s access to power,
wealth and prestige.

His addition of the two middle classes, the intelligentsia and traditional petit bour-
geoisie, exemplifies his point that the possession of skills is as important as ownership
of property. In the Marxist perspective, these classes are viewed either as a ‘residual’
hangover from feudal society, or functionally dependent on one or both of the prin-
cipal classes (labour and capital). Furthermore, Weber also saw no reason either for
the polarisation of classes or the inevitability of class warfare.

While Marx looked at the structure of production relations and then classified
individuals and groups accordingly, Weber understood class relations as arising
out of competition over ‘life chances’ and social honours. An individual’s ‘market
situation’ fixes their place in the economic order: ‘Class situation is ... ultimately
market situation’ (Weber, cited in Gerth & Mills 1977: 181).

A market situation is defined according to material rewards, such as income,
career prospects, credit potential, residential location, educational background, social
mobility across personality networks and lifestyle culture. In turn, market capacities
give rise to ‘life chances’, the relative market power of one’s attributes. Unlike Marx,
Weber’s class structure is stratified rather than polarised.

Status groups

Weber posited an economic order and a social order as distinct settings for the dif-
ferentiation of individuals and groups. Weber’s basic units for studying social power
were not classes (which he argues cannot act) but groups and organisations.
Stratification in society is determined by the way group power is institutionalised.
Weber agrees with Marx that class relations are rooted in the objective side to
inequality—but Weber also identifies a subjective side entailing ‘status’ and ‘party’.

Status groups are formed on the basis of the collective judgement of others, and the
assignment of honour and prestige within the social order: ‘in contrast to the eco-
nomically determined class situation, we wish to designate as status situations, every
typical component of the life fate of men that is determined by a specific, positive or
negative social estimation of honour’ (Gerth & Mills 1977: 186-7). Status is defined
as the unequal distribution of social honour, which cuts across class. The importance
of status lies in the fact that it can create visible divisions between members of the
same class (tensions between the ‘new rich’ and ‘old money’, locally born working
class versus migrant working class, and so on). Belonging to a status group can
enhance one’s market situation, as with the case of residency, credit potential and
educational background, but it can be as individual as an actual ‘lifestyle’.

Weber coined the term ‘lifestyle’ (lebensstil) to suggest that the accumulation of
social honour requires conformity to a certain consistent ‘style of life’. Lifestyle varies
widely: the lifestyle of a skateboarding teenager is distinct from that of a business
executive; nevertheless, social honour plays an equally important role within the
membership of these groups, regardless of what constitutes that honour.

The importance of lifestyle was taken up by the work of Pierre Bourdieu, who
contrasted the concept of economic capital with that of symbolic or ‘cultural capital’

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2 CLASS @®

(Bourdieu 1987). In capitalist society, the cultural capital that is most valued are
activities such as reading books, seeing films, travel and consuming things that indi-
cate worldliness. This cultural capital can function as a means of mobility in a society
where, economically, individuals are tightly locked into their market situation.

An individual’s ability to participate in prestigious groups is limited by what
Weberians call ‘social closure’ (Parkin 1979). Many status groups (for example, aris-
tocratic, intellectual and religious groups) achieve social closure by promoting inter-
marriage within their group, and by crediting themselves with titles, awards and
status symbols. This helps identify ‘insiders’ (those who belong to the status group)
and helps maintain social distance from ‘outsiders’ (those who do not belong to the
status group).

Status is a much wider concept than class, as it implicates gender, ethnicity, race
and age. In a multicultural society where families are increasingly diversified, status
is becoming increasingly important as a mark of individual identity (see Chapter 8).

Party

With ‘classes’ corresponding to the economic order, and ‘status groups’ making up
the social order, there are also organisations in society where individuals form groups
specifically in order to wield power and influence over others. These include political
parties—such as the Liberal, Labor and Greens parties—but they can also be pressure
groups and social movements. Membership of a party also intersects with class, and
can sometimes be at odds with an individual's class.

Mass political parties and interest groups are each concerned with asserting
power, but they need not be acting from a desire to protect economic self-interest.
Power is defined by Weber as ‘the probability that one actor within a social relation-
ship will be in a position to carry out his own will despite resistance, regardless of the
basis on which this probability rests’ (Weber [1922] 1968: 53). This power can be
sourced from (i) access to the organised use of force, such as having command of
police, military and security services; (ii) control over material resources of money,
land and labour; and (iii) control of symbolic rewards (for example, a university con-
ferring degrees).

Various Australians have deployed Weber’s concepts to good effect. Encel (1970)
investigated the existence of a ‘power elite’ that dominates Australia. This elite is
not the same as a ruling class, because it is drawn from well-established pastoral and
business families, professionals, political actors and high-ranking public officers.
Membership of this class can be sourced from combinations of property ownership,
educational background, political power and interlocking family connections. Encel
also differentiated upper and lower fractions of the working class according to how
the possession of skill influences ‘life chances’ and market situation. Subsequently,
Wild (1978) and Dempsey (1990) each produced studies of the confluence of prop-
erty earnings, educational attainment and status closure to differentiate power in
various Australian settings.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO3 Distinguish
between different
classes in Australian
society and the
functions they perform

li CLASSES IN AUSTRALIA

We have seen how the main perspectives on class posit different models of (i) the
nature of class and (ii) the function and identity of each class. The Marxist model
discourages viewing classes as directly observable phenomena. This is because, for the
Marxists, class is more than a group and primarily a structural relationship. It matters
less who occupies the positions of rulers and ruled; rather, the object of inquiry
focuses on the reproduction of these positions, and the class conflict it produces.

The Weberian model allows for a more detailed description of the various kinds of
class that exist in Australia, because it uses a wider range of indicators than the rela-
tionship to productive capital. Status and power are important independent factors
that contribute to individuals’ social position. Nearly all species of class theory, how-
ever, are content to recognise the existence of a ruling class, a stratified middle class
and a stratified working class.

The ruling or upper class

The ruling class is perhaps the least visible of all classes in Australia. Marxists argue
that not only does the ruling class own the means of production; it also controls the
state apparatus and access to information on how their private holdings of productive
resources influence society. Surveying the membership of boards of large companies
gives some insight into the close-knit nature of such a class (see Chesters 2011).

Prominent sociological analysts of the activities of the ruling classes are Connell
(see Connell 1977; Connell & Irving 1992), Kuhn & O’Lincoln (1996), Gilding (2000,
2005), and Murray, Bierling and Alexander (1995). Connell (1977: 50) argued that this
class is highly organised. It maintains a cultural and ideological hegemony, a form of
moral leadership that is exercised economically, politically and ideologically (see
Chapter 11 for an extended discussion of this). Economically, it has a monopoly over
the ownership and control of productive resources; politically, it mobilises politicians
to defend their proprietorial, legal and financial interests; and ideologically, it pres-
sures governments to produce policies affecting the media, education and the arts that
are favourable to its world-view. Given its status and lifestyle, this class is politically
out of touch with the needs of the working class and the unemployed. In an attack on
the neo-liberal economic reforms of the 1990s, Michael Pusey (2003: 163) condemns
the ruling class for abandoning any concern for national or community values:
“,.. these corporate leaders, these faceless men, are now as before in our history gener-
ally egoistical and amoral people with little feeling for, or attachment to, the nation.’

Furthermore, in conducting their daily life, the ruling class has little interest in the
social services on which most of the nation depends. Probert (2001) remarks that the
‘overclass’

... have no use for the major institutions of the welfare state, public hospitals, public
schools or pensions. They benefit from the short-term profit seeking of highly mobile
investment funds. The rise of performance-related pay and bonuses, rather than status

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2 CLASS @q

based salaries, helps to detach this group from more egalitarian workplace cultures.
They are likely to believe that the public sector is a drain on the private sector’s ability
to generate wealth, however untrue this might be.

The Australian ruling class exhibits a high degree of concentrated ownership.
Mining, pastoral activity, manufacturing, the media and service-sector corporations
are being concentrated in fewer and fewer hands, as Marx predicted (Chesters 2011).
Where such concentration does not appear on assets listings and share listings
(private companies are not compelled to provide such information), it is also realised
by interlocking directorships. Family background and intermarriage are other power-
ful agents of the maintenance of ruling elites (Gilding 2000: 171):

... fortunes are rarely vested in individuals alone. For a variety of reasons—notably, tax
minimisation, business partnerships, the terms of inheritance, and protection against
bankruptcy and criminal proceedings—they are usually spread out among groups of
individuals. Most commonly, these groups of individuals are related through kinship.
(Gilding 2005: 30)

This power of the super-rich to hide their wealth encourages many less wealthy
Australians to believe that there is no ruling class in this land of opportunity (Connell &
Irving 1974).

The middle class

As noted earlier, Australia has seen an enormous growth of a middle class, but the
economic processes behind such a class are not necessarily directly observable. Is the
middle class merely functionally dependent on the two great classes, or is it a force in
its own right? For corporations selling products, the middle class provides an indis-
pensable market of consumers. As the largest class, it also commands occupations
among significant income groups and dominates managerial positions, giving it con-
siderable power in the capitalist market of products and ideas.

Many analysts argue that the middle class cannot simply be positioned as a func-
tional relay between capital and labour. For example, Beilharz (1985) argues that the
so-called new middle class is intrinsic to contemporary capitalist production. The most
important middle-class fraction to emerge in Australia is an outcome of the expanding
welfare state and its requirements for ‘service, administrative and reproductive func-
tions’ (1985: 100). At the same time, this fraction of the middle class do important work
in providing the managerial skills necessary for dealing with the complex problems and
risks associated with contemporary global capitalism. Largely due to their educational
background, the middle-class strata of welfare administrators generally command
higher salaries than the manual working class.

Yet, Cater’s (2013) claim that these tertiary-educated professionals have become a
ruling class in their own right is contradicted by evidence suggesting that they have
become increasingly insecure over the past few decades. In The Experience of Middle

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@q AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Australia, Pusey (2003) sources this insecurity in the deregulation that undermined
the stability of the arbitrated industrial system during the 1990s (see Chapter 10).
This promoted a dramatic turn away from the more egalitarian conditions that
Horne observed in the 1960s. Pusey interviewed a random sample of 400 people
across five cities whose incomes range above the lowest one-third and below the
highest tenth. He recorded views on family life, politics and community, from
which he sketched an image of a ruthless neo-liberal capitalism breaking up the
access people had to strong community ties and family life. Instead, this ‘middle
Australia’ had been forced to turn to the market and consumerism in order to
obtain the material and symbolic means of existence, as people’s everyday networks
become thinner and households become more individualistic. In Pusey’s account,
middle Australia is more the victim of contemporary capitalist restructuring than
the architect of change.

The working class

In association with recent changes to the workforce, the number of Australians who
identify as working class has declined over time. This decline is associated with the
decline of Australian manufacturing employment (see Chapter 10). This ‘post-
industrialisation’ of work in Australia, evident in the growth of a large service sector,
is also associated with the decline of working-class culture.

The traditional strength of the Australian working class was indicated by the fact
that Australia was one of the first countries in the world to have a labour party,
established specifically to represent workers. During the 1890s, the union movement
had suffered greatly under a severe economic depression, regional legislation and
government suppression, leading to strike actions that produced a stalemate between
capital and labour.

By the time of Federation, Prime Minister Alfred Deakin promoted a culture of
arbitration between labour and capital. The setting of a ‘basic wage’ by Justice
Higgins of the Federal Arbitration Court in 1907 had the effect of ‘institutionalising’
the nature of class conflict in Australia for the next 80 years (Sorrell 1977). It was
designed to act as a ‘family’ wage, defined as ‘a wage sufficient for an unskilled
labourer to maintain himself and his family in frugal comfort’ (J. Hagan, cited in
Gardner & Palmer 1997). State-sponsored arbitration between labour organisa-
tions and employers also gave workers’ unions a strong sense of legitimacy, and for
most of the 20th century unionisation rates remained at over 50 per cent of the
workforce. This situation remained until the 1980s, when—ironically—a federal
Labor government attempted to raise Australia’s international competitiveness
through union rationalisation and the deregulation of the arbitration system. Rates
of unionisation have subsequently experienced a steep downward trend (see
Chapter 10).

For most 21st-century workers, industrial relations have come to be character-
ised by whatever they can wrest from their employers, rather than a fair and reason-
able wage based on the collectively determined ‘living wage’. The decline in

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2 CLASS @q

US 485) Profit and wages share of national income 1965-2011

—— Compensation of employees share u
= of total factor income 3
os oe al — Profits share of total factor income pete a
Be L275 §
>E i) ep
26 60.05 2
Fe + 25.0 §
Oe =
5 8 B75is| 22.5 6
28 By
=> 55.0- | 20.0 &
o & oy
22 L17.5
oO = ae
Eo ez” L150 3
OG
© 50.0- L125 2
i T T T T 1 =~
1965-66 1974-75 1983-84 1992-93 2001-02 2010-11 s

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012) Australian System of National Accounts, 2011-12, Cat. No. 5204.0, released
2 November, under ‘Income from GDP’. © Commonwealth of Australia.

collective bargaining has increased the power of capital at the expense of individual
workers. Figure 2.4 presents an indication of the relative strengths of the power of
capital and labour as unionisation of the working class has declined to below
20 per cent of the working population. The proportion of national income that has
gone to workers (in wages) has declined while the proportion going to capital (in
profit) has increased.

The underclass and poverty wars LO4 Explain the

controversies

One of the most contested debates in the contemporary literature on class is over the surrounding the
existence of an underclass in Australia. This concept identifies an important group P°V"Y “a5
marginalised from the core economic activities of Australian society. Probert includes

in this category

... the unemployed and the very insecurely employed; the people on various kinds underclass
. . A permanently unemployed
of make-work schemes; the discouraged job seekers; the mothers who cannot afford class that has emerged in many

post-industrial countries. Some
live below the poverty line—at
survive; those on disability pensions who would work if appropriate jobs existed; those a level at which they cannot
maintain a basic existence.
Some social commentators such
as Deborah Hope suggest that

: : : : Aborigines are the most visible
For some Marxist sociologists, however, unemployed workers are still deemed to ample of anunderclassin
belong to the working class, even though they cannot actively exercise the power to Australia (Hope 2000).
withdraw their labour. In the context of contemporary capitalist employment prac-
tices (see Chapter 10), full-time continuous employment for both skilled and
unskilled workers is declining. Official employment statistics hide a high degree
of part-time, casualised and piecemeal forms of employment. The right to a decent
form of employment in which workers are respected for a fair day’s work has been
greatly eroded, along with the idea of a ‘living wage’. As job conditions in many

industries deteriorate, more workers either drop out of the labour market, undergo

childcare; the growing army of the working poor who rely on welfare support to

with part-time jobs who need a full-time income. (Probert 2001)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@q® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

capabilities

Aterm coined by the Nobel
Prize-winning Indian economist
Amartya Sen to describe the
functioning, as distinct from
abstract, freedoms people need
in order to pursue the type of
lives they value.

LOS Analyse how
sociologists measure
inequalities

long periods of welfare dependency and long-term unemployment or experience
precarious employment.

The first sociologist to argue for the existence of an underclass, William Wilson
(1987), claimed that the emergence of the long-term unemployed in advanced
capitalist countries would soon bring about generational reproduction of the condi-
tion, in which educational disadvantage and poverty would lead an increasing
number of persons to crime, drug addiction, depression, family breakdown and an
inability to participate in many aspects of public life.

Until 2001 there had been no significant studies in Australia to suggest that an
underclass of permanently unemployed had become a significant local phenomenon.
However, in December 2001, the debate over an underclass metamorphosed into the
‘poverty wars’, with the release of a report conducted by a well-respected Canberra-
based research centre—the National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling
(NATSEM). The report, Financial Disadvantage in Australia 1990 to 2000: The
Persistence of Poverty in a Decade of Growth, was commissioned by The Smith Family
and presented the case that poverty in Australia was more extensive than most
Australians had been prepared to admit. On the basis of the evidence, The Smith
Family argued that Australia was dividing into the ‘haves’ and the ‘have-nots’.

The Smith Family/NATSEM report constituted a comprehensive appraisal of
poverty in Australia. The benchmark for defining a family living in poverty was a
family with two children, with a combined income of less than half the average
weekly earnings ($416 in 2001). Long-term unemployment was the most basic
circumstance of such poverty. The report calculated that the numbers of
Australians living in ‘relative poverty’ rose from 11.4 per cent to 13 per cent dur-
ing the 1990s despite the fact that the Australian economy was experiencing
impressive economic growth. Relative poverty is defined in relation to average
incomes, rather than the cost of being able to maintain subsistence, which is
defined by a line of ‘absolute poverty’. In October 2012, the Australian Council of
Social Services (ACOSS 2012: 6) released a report entitled Poverty in Australia that
found that the extent of relative poverty had marginally increased over the decade
since the original Smith Family/NATSEM report.

However, relative poverty involves more than survival on a low income. It is
indicative of a class of persons who have low capabilities as a result of their social
disadvantage (see Headey 2005). Such capabilities may be restricted by a lack of access
to social, cultural and human capital as well as poor health conditions that often
accompany low income. In other words, the chances of the poor improving their sta-
tion is limited by their structural circumstances, and this finding undermines the idea
of a ‘fair-go’ society.

Nevertheless, critics of the Smith Family/NATSEM report belittled the concept
of relative poverty. A month after it was released, the Centre for Independent
Studies (CIS 2002) attacked the methodology of the report, with Poor Arguments:
A Response to The Smith Family Report on Poverty in Australia, stating that it was

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 2 CLASS @q

configured to return measurements of increasing poverty to suit the interests of the
welfare lobby in which The Smith Family is a major player. The specific criticism
was that NATSEM used half of the mean (average) family income rather than half
of the median, which would have produced a poverty rate four percentage points
lower. The median income is the income that is located exactly halfway down the
full range of incomes. The CIS criticised the use of the average income because this
measure is more sensitive to movements at the top end of the income scale, which
can raise the number of people in poverty using NATSEM’s definition of poverty.
The CIS interpretation of the NATSEM data was that while the rich had got
considerably richer, the poor had become richer at a lower rate. Robertson (2012)
levelled a similar criticism at the use of ‘relative poverty’ in the 2012 ACOSS Report,
arguing that under this definition, “even if everyone becomes richer, “poverty”
would stay exactly the same’.

Both sides of the debate agreed that there was an arbitrariness to the setting of a
relative poverty-line benchmark. What is not arbitrary, however, is the fact that con-
sistent use of the same benchmark over time will return a more objective measure-
ment of a trend based on that benchmark. Thus, while the CIS showed that the
poverty rate would be lower than using the average if NATSEM used the half-median
method, it drew little attention to the fact that even if the median method was used,
the number of Australians living in poverty grew over the 1990s. Furthermore,
NATSEM tested 12 separate poverty measures, 11 of which demonstrated an increase
in poverty, with the half-mean method exemplifying the trend.

Defenders of the capitalist system argue that inequality is in fact inevitable and
that the poor will always be with us. They give credit to the ruling and employing
classes for creating wealth in society. In doing so, everyone in society can benefit,
even if the rich benefit at a greater rate. They argue that it is better to give poor
people a ‘hand up’ rather than a ‘hand out’ (Skeffington 2002). This argument is
based on two assumptions: first, it suggests that the privileges of the wealthy have
nothing to do with the circumstances of those in poverty; second, that the posi-
tion of those in poverty is principally an individual failure to take advantage of
opportunities.

However, this approach tends to gloss over the social experience of poverty.
People’s opportunities are framed within the context of the assets and opportunities
held by other members of society. Gaining employment requires adequate trans-
portation, acceptable attire and sometimes useful social networks. For a child to
learn to participate in society, they also require adequate resources from their par-
ents, including funds for school trips and sporting club fees, as well as adequate
clothes, shelter and food. For this reason, measuring whether Australians experi-
ence ‘relative poverty’ is a more socially meaningful debate than whether they suffer
‘absolute poverty’.

As Leigh (2013: 86) states in Battlers and Billionaires: The Story of Inequality in
Australia: “You can’t define poverty without thinking about what’s normal in a society’.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


