@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

In

other words, wealth and poverty are inter-related, and ignoring this relationship

inevitably results in an inadequate assessment of poverty. As the British social
reformer Richard Tawney wrote in 1913: ‘what thoughtful rich people call the prob-
lem of poverty, thoughtful poor people call with equal justice a problem of riches’
(quoted in Leigh 2013: 86).

CONCLUSION

This chapter has examined class in modern Australian society. However, class is often experienced at an everyday
level in ways that are not as visible as the categories of gender and ethnicity explored in Chapters 4 and 5.
Often the categories we need to adequately describe class can be elusive, as they become politically
appropriated by representatives of class power—as we have just seen in the ‘poverty wars’ debate.
Relative poverty can be explained away as the result of personal failings of the poor, thereby obscuring
how power relations are implicated in perpetuating inequality. As we shall see in Chapters 10, 13 and

14, the representation of class relationships can become encrypted within media discourses as well as
obscured by processes of globalisation. Yet it can also be the case that the class basis of capitalist society is
an upside-down reality where, as the Australian Marxists Kuhn and O’Lincoln noted in the introduction to this
chapter, the reality of class society is not always what it appears to be. The widespread perception of Australian
egalitarianism and affluence often masks structural inequalities of wealth, income, status and power.

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

oN OM

10.

le

Examining the Lorenz curves in Figure 2.1, approximately what proportion of national income
goes to the top 20 per cent of income holders, and what proportion of national wealth goes to
the wealthiest 20 per cent? What conclusion can be drawn on the relationship between income
inequality and wealth inequality? (LO1)

. Does high social status (or prestige) always correspond with a high economic class position,

and does a low class position necessarily correspond with low social status? List five examples
where class and status do not correspond. (LO2)

. Do political parties in Australia represent class interests? (LO2)

4. Australian opinion polls consistently find that Australians believe ‘a fair go’ is part of the

national character. To what extent is this warranted by evidence? (LO3)

. Is Australia a class society? (LO3)

. Does Australia have a ruling class? (LO3)

. Is class a declining factor in Australian society? (LO3)

. How is the working class presented in popular culture and in the media? What symbols depict

the working class? (LO4)

. Does the evidence from the poverty wars in Australia suggest the formation of a new

underclass? (LO4)
Why did such intense controversy surround the statistical measurement of mean and median

income during the ‘poverty wars’ debate? (LO5)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


Pnerenences

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009) Household Income and Income Distribution, 2007-08, Cat. No.
6523.0, Canberra, AGPS.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012) Australian System of National Accounts, 2011-12, Cat. No. 5204.0,
released 2/11/2012, under ‘Income from GDP’, Canberra, AGPS.
Australian Council of Social Services (ACOSS) (2012) Poverty in Australia, ACOSS Paper 194, Sydney, ACOSS.
Baekgaard, H. (1998) NATSEM Discussion Paper No. 35, The Distribution of Household Wealth in Australia: 1986
and 1993.
Beilharz, P. (1985) ‘Theorizing the Middle Class’, Arena Magazine, 72, pp. 92-105.
Bourdieu, P. (1987) Outline of a Theory of Practice, trans. Richard Nice, New York, Cambridge University Press.
Cater, N. (2013) The Lucky Culture and the Rise of an Australian Ruling Class, Sydney, HarperCollins Publishers.
Centre for Independent Studies (CIS) (2002) ‘Poor Arguments: A Response to The Smith Family Report on
Poverty in Australia’, C/S Issue Analysis 21, 16 January, available at <http://www.cis.org.au/publications/
issue-analysis/article/88 1-poor-arguments-a-response-to-the-smith-family-report-on-poverty-in-
australia>.
Chesters, J. (2011) ‘Wealth Inequality in Australia’, refereed paper delivered at the 2011 TASA Conference,
University of Newcastle.
Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics (CBCS) (1973) Income Distribution, 1968-1969, Part 1,
Reference No. 17.6, Canberra, CBCS.
Connell, R.W. (1977) Ruling Class, Ruling Culture, Melbourne, Cambridge University Press.
Connell, R.W. & Irving, T.H. (1974) ‘Yes Virginia, There is a Ruling Class’, in H. Mayer & H. Nelson (eds), Australian
Politics: A Third Reader, Melbourne, Cheshire.
Connell, R.W. & Irving, T.H. (1992) Class Structure in Australian History, 2nd edn, Melbourne, Longman Cheshire.
Dempsey, K. (1990) Smalltown: A Study of Social Inequality, Cohesion and Belonging, Melbourne, Oxford
University Press.
Encel, S. (1970) Equality and Authority: A Study of Class, Status and Power in Australia, Melbourne, Cheshire.
Finlay, R. (2013) ‘The Distribution of Household Wealth in Australia: Evidence from the 2010 HILDA Survey’,
Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, March Quarter 2012.
Fiske, J., Turner, G. & Hodge, B. (1987) Myths of Oz: Reading Australian Popular Culture, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.
Gardner, M. & Palmer, G. (1997) Employment Relations: Industrial Relations and Human Resources Management
in Australia, Melbourne, Macmillan.
Gerth, H. & Mills, C. Wright (eds) (1977) From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, Boston, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Gilding, M. (2000) ‘Superwealth in Australia: Entrepreneurs, Accumulation and the Capitalist Class’, Journal of
Sociology, 35(2), August, pp. 169-82.
Gilding, M. (2005) ‘Families and Fortunes: Accumulation, Management Succession and Inheritance in Wealthy
Families’, Journal of Sociology, 41(1), pp. 29-45.
Greenville, J., Pobke, C. & Rogers, N. (2013) ‘Trends in the Distribution of Income in Australia’, Productivity
Commission Staff Working Paper, March, Melbourne, Productivity Commission.
Headey, B. (2005) A Framework for Assessing Poverty, Disadvantage and Low Capabilities in Australia, Melbourne
Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research, University of Melbourne.
Herscovitch, B. (2013) ‘A Fair Go: Fact or Fiction?’, The Centre for Independent Studies Policy Monograph 135,
Sydney, CIS.
Hope, D. (2000) ‘Beneath the Bottom Line’, The Australian Magazine, 6 May.
Horne, D. (1967) The Lucky Country, Melbourne, Penguin Books.
Jones, F.L. (1975) ‘The Changing Shape of the Australian Income Distribution, 1914-15 to 1968-69’, Australian
Economic History Review, 15, pp. 21-34.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


N SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Kuhn, R. & O’Lincoln, T. (eds) (1996) Class and Class Conflict in Australia, Melbourne, Longman.

Leigh, A. (2013) Battlers and Billionaires: The Story of Inequality in Australia, Melbourne, Black Inc.

McLean, I.W. & Richardson, S. (1986) ‘More or Less Equal? Australian Income Distribution in 1933 and 1981’,
Economic Record, 62, pp. 67-81.

Marks, G.N., Headey, B. & Wooden, M. (2005) ‘Household Wealth in Australia: Its Components, Distribution and
Correlates’, Journal of Sociology, 41(1), pp. 47-68.

Marx, K. (1976) Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Vol. |, intro. E. Mandel & trans. B. Fowkes, London,
Penguin.

Murray, G., Bierling, J. & Alexander, M. (1995) ‘The Rich Countries: Australia, New Zealand and Japan’, Current
Sociology, 43(1), pp. 11-63.

Parkin, F. (1979) Marxism and Social Theory: A Bourgeois Critique, London, Tavistock Publications.

Probert, B. (2001) ‘Holding Together: Class in the Year 2001’, Federation Lecture, <www.abc.net.au/rn/
sunspec/stories/s261974.htm>, accessed 4 April 2011.

Pusey, M. (2003) The Experience of Middle Australia: The Dark Side of Economic Reform, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) (2009) ‘The Composition and Distribution of Household Wealth in Australia’,
RBA Bulletin, April.

Robertson, P. (2012) ‘Shame or Sham? Assessing Poverty in Australia’, The Conversation, 16 October, <http://
theconversation.com/shame-or-sham-assessing-poverty-in-australia-10149>.

Saunders, P. (1993) ‘Longer Run Changes in the Distribution of Income in Australia’, Economic Record, 69,
pp. 353-66.

Saunders, P. (2001) ‘Income and Welfare Centenary Article—Household Income and Its Distribution’, Year Book
Australia, 2001, <www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/>.

Skeffington, R. (2002) ‘The Poverty Trap’, Business Review Weekly, 24 January, p. 12.

Smith Family, The & National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling (NATSEM) (2001) Financial
Disadvantage in Australia 1990 to 2000: The Persistence of Poverty in a Decade of Growth, Camperdown, The
Smith Family, available at <http://www.natsem.canberra.edu.au/storage/financial%20disadvantage%20
in%20australia%20 1990%20to%202000.pdf>.

Sorrell, G. (1977) ‘The Arbitration System’, in J. Playford & D. Kirsner (eds), Australian Capitalism: Towards a
Socialist Critique, Melbourne, Penguin.

Stilwell, F. & Primrose, D. (2009) ‘The Distribution of Wealth in Australia’, in J. Schofield (ed.), Equality Speaks:
Challenges for a Fair Society, Sydney, Catalyst Australia.

Thompson, E. (1994) Fair Enough: Egalitarianism in Australia, Sydney, University of New South Wales Press.

United Nations Development Program (UNDP) (2010) UN Human Development Report, <http://hdrstats.undp.
org/en/indicators/87506.htmI>.

Weber, M. ([1922] 1968) Economy and Society, Los Angeles, University of California Press.

Western, J.S. (ed.) (1983) Social Inequality in Australian Society, Melbourne, Macmillan.

Wheelwright, T. (1993) ‘Are the Rich Getting Richer and the Poor Getting Poorer? If so, Why?’, in T. Jagtenberg
& P. D’Alton (eds), Four Dimensional Social Space, Sydney, Harper, pp. 45-8.

Wild, R. (1978) Social Stratification in Australia, Sydney, George Allen & Unwin.

Wilkins, R. (2013) ‘The Distribution and Dynamics of Household Net Wealth’, in R. Wilkins (ed.), Families, Incomes
and Jobs Volume 8, A Statistical Report on Waves 1 to 10 of the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in

Australia Survey, Faculty of Business and Economics, The University of Melbourne.
Wilson, William J. (1987) The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3

ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA‘'S
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES

APTER OUTLINE

© This chapter begins with an examination of the patterns of structured inequality in
Australian society that affect the lives of Australia’s Indigenous people. It discusses these
patterns in the context of racism.

& The political, social and cultural marginalisation of Indigenous people is further explored
through a discussion of the sociohistorical construction of the Australian nation. The
discussion focuses on the history of colonialism and dispossession, followed by an overview
of post-World War Il government policies with respect to Aborigines. This discussion raises a
number of issues in relation to contemporary land rights and citizenship.

™ Thecomplexities of Aboriginal identity are explored in order to problematise the idea of an
‘authentic’ or ‘pure’ Aboriginal culture, and to examine the tensions that arise in relation to
Aboriginal identity in the context of contemporary identity politics.

™® Ademographic and social profile of Indigenous Australians is provided, with a focus on the
labour market, education, income, housing and health.

® Finally, processes of reconciliation are examined as responses to the history of racism and
structured inequality in Australian society. Whether or not these processes can create
social justice for Indigenous Australians is raised as a critical question for the future of the
Australian nation.

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Interpret statistics on the disadvantages of
Indigenous Australians in terms of structural
inequality underpinned by a racist ideology

LO2 Explain the significance of colonialism and
dispossession on the contemporary social
experiences of Indigenous Australians

LO3 Analyse Aboriginal identities as contested and
identify the processes of identity politics
involved in the social construction of
Aboriginal identities

LO4 Describe the demographic and social profiles
of Indigenous Australians

LO5 Recognise the existence of racism in Australian
society and discuss how reconciliation requires
the construction of a‘new’ dialogue between
Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians

© Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

The following list provides an overview of the social situations of Australia’s
Indigenous people Indigenous people. Read through this material carefully and examine your personal
The original residents responses to each fact. Think, for example, of what you consider to be the causes and

and owners of a land at the

time of colonisation. CONSequences of each.

Between 2000 and 2008, the imprisonment rate for Indigenous Australians increased
by 34.5 per cent; in 2008, Indigenous people were 17.2 times more likely to be
imprisoned than non-Indigenous people (Australian Bureau of Statistics, ABS
2008a; Australian Institute of Criminology, AIC 2009).

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are much more likely to be victims of
violence than other people (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, AIHW
2008: x-xi).

Aboriginal women are 15 times more likely to be hospitalised as a consequence of
domestic violence than are non-Aboriginal women; in addition, Aboriginal women
are ten times more likely to die as a result of this violence than are non-Aboriginal
women (Australian Broadcasting Corporation, ABC 2001).

In 2011, unemployment rates were three times as high among Indigenous
Australians as among other Australians (17 per cent compared with 5 per cent)
(ABS 2012b).

In 2006, approximately 40 per cent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults
were in the bottom 20 per cent of incomes; this increased from 36 per cent in 1996
(AIHW 2008: x).

In 2011, Indigenous people aged 15 years and over were half as likely as the total
Australian population to have completed Year 12 (25 per cent compared with 49 per
cent) (ABS 2014).

The Indigenous population has an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent, compared
with 1.2 per cent for the non-Indigenous population (ABS 2009).

The age structure of the Indigenous population differs from that of the non-Indigenous
population: 2.9 per cent of Indigenous people are aged over 65, compared with 12.8 per
cent of the non-Indigenous population; and 38 per cent of the Indigenous population
are under the age of 15, compared with 19 per cent of the non-Indigenous population
(Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission, HREOC 2008: 286). The Indig-
enous population is relatively young, with a median age of 21 years compared to
38 years for the non-Indigenous population (ABS 2012b).

Between 2001 and 2004, approximately twice as many low-birth weight infants
were born to Indigenous women compared to those born to non-Indigenous
women; relatedly, disorders of growth and nutrition are prevalent among Aborigi-
nal people (HREOC 2008: 291; National Health Strategy, NHS 1992: 89-90).
In 2008, low birth weight remained around twice as common for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander babies as for other babies (AIHW 2008: ix).

Indigenous Australians are nearly twice as likely to be obese as non-Indigenous
Australians; approximately 60 per cent of Indigenous adults were overweight or
obese in 2004/05 (AIHW 2008: xi).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA'S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES aq

m@ Indigenous persons are more likely to report high levels of psychological distress
than non-Indigenous persons (AIHW 2008: x; 2009: x), and make twice as many
contacts with community mental health care services as non-Indigenous persons
(AIHW 2008: xii).

m@ Indigenous Australians are hospitalised for intentional self-harm at more than
twice the rate of non-Indigenous Australians (AIHW 2009: 57).

m@ Indigenous males have life expectancies 11.5 years lower than non-Indigenous
males (67.2 years compared with 78.7 years) and Indigenous females have life expec-
tancies 9.7 years lower than non-Indigenous females (72.9 years compared with
82.6 years) (ABS 2011); between 1999 and 2003, in Queensland, South Australia,
Western Australia and the Northern Territory, 75 per cent of Indigenous males and
65 per cent of Indigenous females died before the age of 65 years, compared to
26 per cent of males and 16 per cent of females in the non-Indigenous population
(AIHW 2005, cited in Calma 2008: 21).

A sociological account of this profile begins by noting how important it is that
these facts be examined in their entirety. While each ‘fact’ provides us with a very
important piece of information about an aspect of Aboriginal life in Australia, it is
when the facts are viewed as a whole that a pattern becomes apparent. Sociologically,
these data provide evidence of a pattern of structural inequality in Australian society. _ structural inequality
Following Walter (2007), Atkinson et al. have clearly stated that: The distribution of power,

wealth, income and social
status between groups
that constitutes an overall

If a consistently shared socio-economic position can be considered the basis of social pattern of inequality

class, then Indigenous Australians form their own class, firmly wedged at the bottom
of Australian society. (Atkinson et al. 2008: 6)

Furthermore, a sociological account argues that this structural inequality is the
outcome of a number of sociohistorical processes and events, in this case the most
significant being colonialism, dispossession and racism. (We discuss each of these in _ dispossession
this chapter. merase
While data such as those presented above are useful in identifying the existence — owneiship ofaterritory.
of structural inequality in contemporary Australian society, it is important to acknowl- dsmsng ndgenous peopl’
edge that the way in which the data are represented can have significant negative _ tightsto ownership of their
effects. Identifying the differences between Indigenous and non-Indigenous “*"™*"*
Australians is a two-edged sword. On the one hand, the data provide a way of
acknowledging areas of extreme disadvantage (e.g. in health, education) that can be
used to identify where policies need to be focused in order to improve the wellbeing
of Indigenous Australians. On the other hand, however, such data serve to reinforce
the social and cultural boundaries between Indigenous and non-Indigenous
Australians; in effect, they are mechanisms that support the historical process of
‘Othering’ that has contributed to the disadvantaged position of Indigenous
Australians. There is an emerging and significant body of research that demon-

strates the negative effects of statistics that compare Indigenous Australians with the

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@q AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO1 Interpret statistics
on the disadvantages
of Indigenous
Australians in terms of
structural inequality
underpinned by a racist
ideology

race
A contentious and ambiguous
term that has had, and
continues to have, a variety

of meanings. It is basically a
set of symbolic characteristics
marking the boundary between
two or more social groups;
these may be physiological
and/or cultural. Almost no
contemporary scholars use the
term ‘race’ to refer to distinct
subgroups based on biological
characteristics; however,

this idea still holds strong in
public discourse.

‘mainstream’ (Gorringe et al. 2011; Eickelkamp 2011). This research points to the
fact that the measures used for comparison are ‘white’ Western measures of well-
being that do not capture ‘the self-perceptions, lived reality and sociocultural prac-
tices of Aboriginal people’ (Eickelkamp 2011: 133). Other culturally appropriate
measures that are more relevant to the wellbeing of Indigenous Australians are
rarely adopted in these comparisons. Typically, Indigenous Australians are not
involved in the process of determining what measures should be used to make com-
parisons between Indigenous and non-Indigenous populations; rather, the measures
are imposed on them by the state, further reinforcing the lack of agency and control
that Indigenous peoples have over their own lives. The data thus serve to maintain
and legitimise white privilege; that is, ‘the unearned advantages and benefits that
accrue by virtue of a system that holds white experiences, values and perceptions as
the norm’ (Wing Sue 2003, cited in Habibis & Walter 2009: 44). The outcome is that
policies and programs to improve the wellbeing of Indigenous Australians are often
developed without input from Indigenous people (see, for example, Tilbury 2009),
are not culturally sensitive and thus ‘cannot function as a basis for meaningful sup-
port strategies’ (Eickelkamp 2011: 133). As a consequence, critics have argued that
Australian policies to address the disadvantaged position of Indigenous Australians
‘have been a dismal failure’ (Dockery 2010: 329).

Mi STRUCTURAL INEQUALITY

‘Structural inequality’ refers to the fact that the distribution of power, wealth,
income and social status between individuals and groups in any society is both
unequal and patterned. Recognising that the inequalities outlined above are struc-
tured is important, because it emphasises the fact that they are not the result of the
actions of individuals; rather, they are the legacy of a long history of social relations.
This structural sociological perspective contrasts with the ‘commonsense’ ideology
of liberal individualism that pervades contemporary Australian society, an ideology
that views individuals as responsible for their own successes and failures (Gray &
Saggers 2002: 128). As Gray and Saggers stress, one of the problems of liberal indi-
vidualism is that it is unlikely to lead to solutions because ‘nothing is more likely
to ensure the perpetuation of inequality than the equal treatment of unequal indi-
viduals’ (2002: 128).

The structural inequalities apparent in any comparison of Indigenous and non-
Indigenous people in Australia are based on race/ethnicity, gender and class. These
are the three main axes along which structural inequalities operate in any society;
they crosscut each other in myriad complex ways (Cohen & Kennedy 2000: 13),
some of which we explore later in this chapter. At this point a word of warning is
required. In adopting a perspective that recognises the differences between
Indigenous and non-Indigenous people as symptomatic of structural inequality, we
should avoid taking a position of structural determinism. The sociohistorical pat-
terns of structural inequality that have developed in Australian society do not totally

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA'S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES aq

determine the behaviours of Aboriginal people. Anthropologist Peter Sutton raises

the important issue of cultural persistence as a factor in perpetuating disadvantage. cultural persistence
He argues that the role of Indigenous social organisations and the traditional power aces and belts tom one
structures and economy that still operate in some communities are often Over- generationto another, which
looked by policy makers. He suggests that social problems are an outcome of the seer
complex interplay of ‘forms of cultural persistence . . . the after-effects of colonisa- _canhave both positive and
tion [and] ghettoisation’ (2001: 149). The adoption of a deterministic view in past negate oucomes
discussions of Indigenous/non-Indigenous relations has had the effect of represent-

ing Aborigines as the passive victims of colonialism and racism (Attwood & Arnold

1992). In contrast, contemporary analyses have highlighted the ways in which

Aborigines have made decisions and acted on these in the context of, but not deter-

mined by, colonialism (Cowlishaw 1988a; Broome 2002). This alternative picture

has emerged as Aborigines have gained opportunities to represent themselves in

public debates, rather than being represented and objectified by the dominant

groups in society. Hearing Aboriginal voices is an important part of gaining a more

balanced perspective on the history of Aboriginal/non-Aboriginal relations. You

will notice that in parts of this chapter there are some rather lengthy quotations.

Most of these are Aboriginal ‘voices’, and we consider it important that they speak

for themselves wherever possible.

Racism

Racism is a complex process involving historical, economic, political, social and cul- racism
tural elements. It can evolve into different forms to suit contemporary circumstances Ma inion
and ideologies. It occurs when ‘social groups categorise other groups as different or _ eaistence of distinct ‘races’, that
inferior, on the basis of (allegedly fixed) phenotypical characteristics, cultural mark- wubrous on hea.
ers or national origin’ (Castles 1996: 31). It involves the use of power and serves to
legitimise the exploitation or exclusion of the group defined as different and/or infe-
rior. While biological (or phenotypical) racism was dominant at the height of colonial-
ism (in the 19th century), since the 1970s cultural racism (based on factors such as
religion, language and national origins) has increased in significance (Castles 1996:
27). This shift has occurred for a number of reasons. One of these is that in the middle
of the 20th century, biologists demonstrated that races do not exist as biological
realities. They have shown that there is greater variation within so-called races than
between them (Cowlishaw 1988b; Castles 1996; Rex & Mason 1986). Maintaining a
belief in the existence of races is in fact a consequence of the power of racism as both
an ideology and a set of practices.
Systematic ideas of racial hierarchy have underpinned European colonialism since
the 15th century. Domination by the ‘superior race’ was considered inevitable and
desirable, because it was thought to lead to human progress (Miles 1989). While ideas
of racial hierarchy may now have been rejected, a process has taken place that Essed
(1991: 14) has labelled the ‘culturalisation of racism’, where it is argued that because
of the biological similarity of humankind it is ‘natural’ to want to preserve one’s cultural

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@q AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

distinctiveness. In this case, the disadvantages experienced by some groups are
explained in terms of ‘backward’ cultural values (Castles 1996: 29), so that a racial
hierarchy is replaced by a cultural hierarchy. This cultural racism is expressed in
more subtle and pervasive ways than earlier forms of biological racism (see Ardill
2009 for a critique of sociobiology). It is embodied in the social institutions of every-
day life and in commonsense discourses (Castles 1996: 44; Durey 2010; see also
Hallinan & Judd 2009 for an analysis of institutionalised racism in the Australian
Football League).

There are many kinds of racism evident in Australia. Some sociologists argue that
it is important to recognise that both Indigenous people and immigrants have been
subjected to racism although their particular experiences may be different. Castles
(1996: 6) argues that there has been little effort to understand the common roots of
racism in Australia because this would mean admitting that racism arises out of the
structure and culture of Australian society, rather than out of the specific characteristics
of the racialised groups.

Ann Curthoys notes that until the 1980s the racisms experienced by Indigenous
people and immigrants were addressed in two distinct public and intellectual debates,
which reflected ‘a history of separate discourses and distinct mechanisms of bureau-
cratic control’ (2000: 22; see also Vasta 1996: 50-2). It was not until the 1980s that the
discourse of multiculturalism began to connect these two sets of concerns by includ-
ing the Indigenous as one culture contributing to the mosaic of diverse cultures in
Australian society (Curthoys 2000: 29).

However, this unity-in-diversity model is not acceptable to many Indigenous peo-
ple, who do not wish to be represented as ‘just one ethnicity among many’ and who do
not necessarily see themselves as one homogeneous group—the Aborigines. They
stress that their situation is different from that of immigrants and other Australians.
Curthoys points to the significance of colonialism for understanding this view. She
argues that an inclusive model of ‘multiculturalism’ is based on the myth that Australia
is a post-colonial society. It thus denies the continuing effect of colonialism. For
Curthoys, it is more accurate to view Australia as colonising and de-colonising at the
same time:

The continuing presence of colonialism has implications for all immigrants,
whether first-generation or sixth. All non-Indigenous people, recent immigrants and
descendants of immigrants alike, are beneficiaries of a colonial history. We share
the situation of living on someone else’s land. The incompleteness of decolonisation
means that Indigenous people and Asian immigrants, while they share a common
experience of racial hostility and being defined outside the nation, at the same
time occupy significantly different places on the colonial—post-colonial spectrum.
(2000: 32-3)

Let us now examine the experiences of Indigenous Australians from a historical
perspective.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA'S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES aq

Mi COLONIALISM AND DISPOSSESSION

Pre-colonial history

Current archaeological research shows that humans first migrated to the Australian
continent from South-East Asia between 40 000 and 60 000 years ago when sea levels
were about 80 metres below current levels. While the date of the first human arrival
is not known, we do know that by 35 000 years ago people had occupied most of the
ecological zones across the continent (Flood 2006: 17). At the time of colonisation
there were around 600 tribes. Members of each tribe shared a common language,
affiliation to and responsibility for a particular tract of country. Further, they shared
a relationship to the Ancestral Beings, who laid down the Law for that country during
the Dreaming. However, the tribes had no political unity and did not act collectively
against outsiders. Anthropologists refer to Australian societies as being of the ‘band
variety’, as this description reflects more accurately the complexity and diversity of
social organisation before colonisation. This form of social organisation was charac-
terised by small, nomadic groups with fluid structures and regular mobility (Flood
2006: 17). It is estimated that the population prior to 1788 was between 500 000 and
750 000 (Flood 2006: 27).

Contact and dispossession

The arrival of Captain James Cook in 1770 marks the beginning of colonialism in
Australia. The history of colonisation is often represented as one in which the
Indigenous people were overwhelmed by a ‘naturally’ superior civilisation. This narra-
tive constructs Aborigines as passive victims of colonialism. It therefore sits comfort-
ably with the racist ideology of the dominant group. Various aspects of this racism are
clearly apparent in the legal fiction of terra nullius, which declared that a land was
‘empty —in other words, that no people with a legitimate claim to sovereignty lived
on this land. Until the 1992 Mabo decision, when terra nullius was overturned,
Australian law continued to uphold the validity of British settlement.

Since the 1970s, however, this history has been rewritten in a way that acknowl-
edges the activism and agency of the Indigenous people who were dispossessed of
their lands by the British (for example, Broome 2002; Markus 1994; Reynolds 2006;
Cowlishaw 1988a; MacDonald 1988; Rowse 1998; Goodall 1996). Initially, both the
British, following instructions from the Home Office to ‘conciliate’ with Aborigines,
and the Eora people of Sydney Cove attempted to work towards a peaceful and
mutually rewarding relationship. While this strategy worked for a short period of
time, it ultimately failed, and Broome argues that ‘contradiction lay at the very
heart of British policy’ (2002: 31). It was followed by a military response (Reynolds
2006). Throughout the colonies Indigenous people resisted the British, and the
level of resistance varied depending on the differing capacities of the local
Indigenous people; however, ‘in some places Europeans faced a serious military
threat and were compelled to act in ways acceptable to aboriginal [sic] populations’

LO2 Explain the
significance of
colonialism and
dispossession on

the contemporary
social experiences of
Indigenous Australians

colonialism

A period of history during which
a Western nation maintains
power over a territory other
than its own home territory.

terra nullius

Literally, ‘empty land’: the legal
fiction which declared that the
land now known as ‘Australia’
contained no people with any
claim to sovereignty of

the territory at the point of
British occupation.

sovereignty

A legal term used in
international law, which
embraces all the rights and
powers connected with a
nation’s powers to govern
itself free from outside
interference. Under
international law, it is unlawful
for one nation to encroach on
another's sovereignty.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

underclass

A permanently unemployed
class that has emerged in many
post-industrial countries. Some
live below the poverty line—at
a level at which they cannot
maintain a basic existence.
Some social commentators such
as Deborah Hope suggest that
Aborigines are the most visible
example of an underclass in
Australia.

human rights

Civil, political, social and
cultural rights, or entitlements,
associated with citizenship and
the nation-state; a modern,
Western idea that, as part of
the process of globalisation, is
increasingly being discussed in
terms of a global citizenry.

assimilation

The process whereby
Indigenous people and
immigrants relinquish their
culture and become
indistinguishable from the
Anglo-Australian dominant
group. It also refers to
Australian government policy
from the 1950s through to the
early 1970s.

(Markus 1994: 18). Aboriginal people also responded in other ways to the colo-
niser; as well, there was evidence of accommodation and adaptation (Reynolds
2006; Reece 1987: 14-23).

Colonialism

Colonial responses to and relations with the Indigenous population have passed through
a number of policy phases: protection and segregation (1830s-1940s); assimilation and
integration (1950s-1972); self-determination and self-management (1972-2005).

PROTECTION AND SEGREGATION (1830s-1940s). During the ‘protection’ era
reserves and missions were established, ostensibly to provide some security for
Aboriginal people who had been dispossessed of their land. Flood points out that
protection ‘at its best . . . eased the transition from traditional to modern Western
society, at its worst it was coercive and racist’ (2006: 201). For example, under the
Queensland Act of 1897, ‘assisted Aborigines’ had to work as directed by the managers
of government reserves and settlements. The government set their wages at about
one-third of the equivalent for whites, paid these into a trust fund administered by the
Department of Aboriginal and Islander Affairs and then returned a small portion to
Aborigines in the form of pocket money.

This legislation clearly served to control the Aboriginal population. Elsewhere in
the country officials could force Aborigines to move from a town or district or to
reside in a government reserve (Markus 1994: 125). In all mainland states except
Victoria, the authorities could remove Aboriginal children from their parents so
that they could be trained as menial workers in white society (1994: 126). With
strategies such as these, the objective of eliminating racial minorities occurred
through cultural absorption.

By the end of the 19th century, authoritarian and interventionist ‘Protection Acts’
had been adopted by most states and the Commonwealth (Markus 1994: 124). This
system of oppression, which legalised and legitimised Aboriginal disadvantage, was
built into the Australian social and political fabric. Racism became institutionalised
and Aboriginality was defined by governments. Markus (1994: 139) concludes that
Aborigines formed an underclass and were deprived of basic human rights.

ASSIMILATION AND INTEGRATION (1950s-1972). After World War II the
‘protectionist’ legislation began to be dismantled and replaced by policies of
assimilation. Assimilation was a vague concept characterised by ambiguities,
confused debates and lack of consensus as to what it meant in practice. While it was
argued that the granting of equal political and civil rights to Aborigines would ‘uplift’
them and lead to equal opportunities, at the same time Aborigines were made wards
of the state. Assimilation was based on a policy of equality predicated on sameness
and the dissolving of difference, on cultural homogeneity and on eradicating
Aboriginal identity.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES @

Prior to World War II, assimilation was discussed in terms of biological absorp-
tion in order to eradicate a perceived threat to white Australia. By facilitating inter-
marriage with Europeans, it was expected that Aboriginal physical characteristics
would be ‘bred out’, and people of Aboriginal descent would become indistinguish-
able from the mainstream population. After World War II the thinking had shifted to
cultural assimilation, and it was argued that Aborigines could become citizens with-
out biological change. In 1951 Paul Hasluck, the Minister for Territories, stated: ‘it is
expected that all persons of Aboriginal blood or mixed blood in Australia will live like
white Australians do’ (cited in Fox 1991: 154).

During the assimilationist phase, Aboriginal children were increasingly taken
from their parents and placed with white families; many had no direct access to their
kin or culture (HREOC 1997; Earle & Fopp 1999: 352). Assimilation replaced the old
agents of colonialism—the missionaries and the reserve managers—with ‘the welfare’.
The surveillance of Aboriginal families continued through the practice of welfarism;
it was now undertaken by welfare authorities.

SELF-DETERMINATION AND SELF-MANAGEMENT (1972-2005). The policy of
‘self-determination’ was introduced in 1972 by the Whitlam Labor government as a
way to redress the severe socioeconomic disadvantage of Aboriginal people. Self-
determination was the official philosophy underlying Indigenous policy in the 1970s
and 1980s, and was subsequently supported by the Federal Labor Government of
1983-1996 (Dockery 2010: 316). According to Dockery:

Self-determination embodies both a recognition of the legitimacy and value of Indigenous
culture in its own right, and the belief that Indigenous people should be empowered to
choose and pursue their desired balance between cultural maintenance and engagement
with the mainstream economy. (2010: 316)

However, critics argue that the changes that have occurred since 1972 have been
limited in scope and have not addressed core issues of Aboriginal powerlessness and
alienation (Markus 1994: 195). They maintain that in practice Aborigines are still
required to conform to the dominant culture and are denied the right to govern their
own affairs. In 1991 the National Inquiry into Racist Violence and the Royal
Commission on Aboriginal Deaths in Custody both reported that Aborigines
continue to experience racism in all aspects of their lives (Markus 1994: 205).
Furthermore, since the abolition of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Commission (ATSIC) in 2005, ‘Australia’s Indigenous peoples have been denied a
formal mechanism for the expression of their political interests’ (Robbins 2010: 257).
Self-determination, then, has been described as ‘more rhetorical than real’ and in
2005, during the Howard era, even the rhetoric of self-determination was replaced
with ‘neo-paternalistic policies cloaked in language of mainstreaming and mutual
obligation’ (Maddison 2009: 484).

welfarism

A policy and set of practices
through which Australian
Aborigines were conceived as
belonging to the state; their
lives were thus subject to all the
mechanisms of social control
available to the state.

self-determination

A policy term encompassing the
processes through which
Indigenous people are
empowered to take ‘control’ of
their own lives to the same
extent as other citizens of the
nation; it symbolises a move
away from welfarism.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

In recent years, two important actions on the part of the federal government have
affected Indigenous Australians: the Northern Territory Emergency Response
(NTER) in June 2007 and the then-Prime Minister Kevin Rudd’s apology to Australia’s
Indigenous people in February 2008 (Rudd 2008). Soon after the release of the Little
Children Are Sacred (Anderson & Wild 2007) report into child abuse and neglect in
the Northern Territory, the Howard government declared a ‘national emergency’ in
Indigenous communities in the Northern Territory (Altman & Johns 2008). While
the legitimacy of this action has been questioned (see Billings 2010), it can be argued
that ‘it at least served to give the appalling circumstances in which many Indigenous
Australians live the attention it has long warranted’ (Dockery 2010: 316). Importantly,
however, the wide-ranging Northern Territory intervention introduced a wide range
of coercive measures including ‘child health checks; prohibitions on alcohol and
pornography; land tenure and housing reforms; social security quarantining; reforming
community governance arrangements; and increased policing’ (Billings 2010: 132-3).
Some of the most enduring changes relate to welfare reforms that ‘aim to make wel-
fare conditional upon responsible behaviour which includes ensuring that children
are enrolled in, and attending school. The welfare reforms also target substance
misuse by limiting income available for expenditure on alcohol’ (Altman & Johns
2008: v). These measures were “enforced through greater control and surveillance of
Aboriginal people’ so that the Northern Territory ‘intervention’ has been described as
‘the most blatant threat to Aboriginal autonomy yet seen in the post-assimilation
period’ (Maddison 2009: 484).

While reviews of the outcomes of these measures have been mixed, there have been
significant concerns expressed regarding some aspects of the process in which the
intervention was established and implemented. It has been argued that the speed with
which the legislation was passed, and the language of ‘emergency’ and ‘crisis’ used by
the government, stifled debate and prevented appropriate scrutiny of the legislative
changes (Billings 2010). The Social Justice Commissioner, Tom Calma, stated that
there were ‘significant human rights concerns raised by the particular approach
adopted by the government’ and recommended changes that would address some of
his concerns (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner
2007). In addition, concerns were expressed over the lack of consultation with
Indigenous peoples and the race-based approach of the intervention (Billings 2010;
Altman & Johns 2008). In the words of the High Court:

The National Emergency Response included a range of measures that have never
before been addressed, at least in peacetime, to any particular group of the Australian
community, let alone a group identified by reference to the race of its members. (Cited
in Billings 2010: 132)

Billings goes on to note that ‘applying these powers to Indigenous peoples places

them on par with outlawed motorcycle gangs, international crime syndicates and
terrorists’ (2010: 140).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES @

Citizenship and land rights

Although racism has been a feature of Australian society since 1788, Markus has
pointed to a shift that took place around the middle of the 20th century. He argues
that in the first half of the century there was a consistent principle that non-Europeans
or Aborigines could not be included in mainstream Australian society. However, this
principle of racial exclusivity began to be eroded after World War II.

With respect to human rights, an important landmark for Indigenous Australians
was the 1967 referendum, when over 90 per cent of the Australian people voted
to amend two clauses in the Constitution which were discriminatory to Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people (Markus & Attwood 1997). Formal discrimination
was finally removed with the passing of the Racial Discrimination Act 1975, which
made it illegal

... for a person to do any act involving a distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference
based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin which has the purpose or
effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal
footing, of any human right or fundamental freedom in the political, economic, social,
cultural or any other field of public life. (Markus 1994: 184)

Throughout the history of Indigenous/non-Indigenous relations, Aboriginal
people have resisted the control of the dominant group. They have fought to gain
access to equal rights within Australian society, and since the 1970s have asserted
their unique rights as Indigenous people, which include rights to land and self-
determination. This has involved a variety of strategies, from working within the
institutional structures of Australian society through to claims for an Aboriginal
nation. However, social justice and citizenship rights for Indigenous Australians
continue to be hampered by racism and the disadvantaged position of Aboriginal
people (Altman 2006, 2009; Altman et al. 2008). Markus (1994: 222) argues that
while many non-Indigenous Australians appear to be ready to consider ‘welfare’
measures, they find it more difficult to accept the idea that Aborigines have rights
predating the British occupation of the continent (Markus 1994: 222; Calma 2008).

The struggle for land rights has been central to the Aboriginal movement through-
out the past century. However, it was not until 1974 that a favourable reaction was
received from the federal government. In 1975 the federal government granted the
Gurindji people 2500 square kilometres of land. By 1982 ‘nearly 10 per cent of
Australia was held by Aborigines’, although the majority of this is in marginal areas
(Flood 2006: 243). In 1982, Eddie Mabo and others representing the Merriam people
claimed the right to ownership of the Murray Islands in the Torres Strait through the
courts. In 1992 the High Court granted them native title to the land on the basis that
they were the original owners and had maintained a traditional connection with the
land. This important legal decision recognised the existence of native title prior to
1788 and dispensed with the notion of terra nullius. In 1996 the High Court handed
down another important decision with respect to land rights. The judgement in the

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO3 Analyse
Aboriginal identities
as contested and
identify the processes
of identity politics
involved in the social
construction of
Aboriginal identities

Indigenous identity
An identity claimed or assigned
(or both) on the basis of
membership of an Indigenous
population.

Aboriginality
Identification as Aboriginal. Like
all social identities, this can be
either claimed or assigned.

Wik case provided that pastoral leases could not extinguish native title; rather, the two
could coexist. Such landmark decisions suggest a readiness to admit ‘that the fictions
which have passed for this country’s history are no longer acceptable’ (Markus 1994:
221). By 2010, the Indigenous estates comprised 20 per cent of Australia’s landmass
(Altman 2006).

Mi ABORIGINAL IDENTITY: WHO IS AN ABORIGINE?
The Australian government defines an Aborigine as someone who:

@ is of Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander descent

@ identifies as an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander

™ is accepted as such by the community in which he or she lives or has lived (see
Langton 1994: 3-4).

However, in reality it is not so simple. Racism has been central to the construction
of Indigenous identity (Maddison 2013). Prior to the time of British contact there
was no notion of ‘Aboriginality’ as such; rather, there were about 600 tribes through-
out Australia, each with their own identity (Holland 1996: 104; Flood 2006: 17).

In some parts of Australia today, tribal or regional identities remain strong and
Indigenous people do not identify themselves as ‘Aboriginal’ (for example, see
Holland 1996). In other parts of the country, Indigenous people identify strongly as
Aboriginal and do not define themselves as Australian (for example, see Everett
1998). Others identify themselves as “Murri’ or ‘Koori’, consciously rejecting identi-
fication as Aboriginal because they view such notions of pan-Aboriginality as colo-
nial constructs (for example, see Anderson 1993-1994). The range of views is evident
in the following quotations from Indigenous people. Jim Everett, a Tasmanian
Aborigine, says:

I pride myself in that I am not an Australian, to me there can be no such thing as post-
colonial, and I cannot bring myself to embrace the identity of our oppressors. I belong
to the Clan Plangermairreener of our First Nation of Bands in Tasmania. I am an
Aboriginal patriot still at war with the illegal occupiers of our First Nation societies and
territories. (1998: Introduction, emphasis added)

He further articulates his Aboriginality as:

... a philosophical set of rules that is manifested in customary cultural practices,
set in a belief of the Great Spirit which comprises our Spiritual All. The Earth
is our Earth Mother ... That is a core within the full meaning of Aboriginality.
(2006: 93)

On the other hand, Wendy Holland, a Murri woman, rejects confinement to such
essentialist constructions of identity. She says:

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES @

Iam still reluctant to use the word aboriginal in describing my own identity. By my very
being, I disrupt essentialist notions of aboriginality and no longer find it useful to identify
in a way that denies a part of myself or any part of my family. These days I find it much
more useful and liberating to be able to speak of myself as having multiple identities and
to recognise that in different contexts and at different times I assume different identities.
(1996: 109. Reproduced by permission of Allen & Unwin Pty Limited)

Natascha McNamara, a former member of the Australian Institute of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS) Council, is another Aboriginal woman
who finds the discourse of essentialism, whether it is imposed by the dominant soci-
ety or articulated by Aboriginal people, limiting. She asserts that:

. we are trapped in an identity built on the past of Utopian culture destroyed,
dispossession and disadvantage being our heritage. In 1988 we carry the shroud
because many Aboriginal activist politicians believe it politic to do so. (1990: 97)

For both Holland and McNamara, asserting multiple identities is liberating.
So what is meant by the term ‘Aboriginal’? How did the idea of an Aboriginal
identity develop? And who is an Aborigine? These are vexed questions given the
history of racism and Indigenous resistance throughout post-contact Australian his-
tory. As with all identities, the answers are ‘political’, in the sense that they are both
determined by and have significant consequences for the power relations between
two (or more) groups of people. Challenges to these power relations can be defused
through a process of ‘identity politics’: for example, by defining ‘them’ as insignifi- identity politics
cant either in numerical terms or in terms of the social characteristics they possess. [rhoris nist senty
This is the process of constructing a group of people as ‘Other’. that involve claiming rights on
Identity politics also involves not only resisting the ‘Othering’ process but using  “*>s*'shaedidenttis.
and subverting it. The members of the subordinate group can challenge the domi-
nance of the powerful group, gain access to power, and thereby destabilise existing
power relations, by defining themselves in a more positive way (Gorringe et al. 2011;
Morgan & Warren 2011). Thus, how Indigenous people are represented by members
of the dominant group and how they represent themselves become crucial strategies
in a complex process involving power.

Representations of Aboriginality

In the Australian context, we have seen that Indigenous/non-Indigenous relations are
structured in terms of a long and sustained history of racism. Let us examine how the
dominant non-Indigenous people have used their power to define and represent
Indigenous people in a way that maintains their positions of power. Let us also examine
how Indigenous definitions and representations of Aborigines simultaneously resist/
challenge and confirm/maintain this status quo. It is important to recognise here that
Indigenous responses to their subordinate positioning and representation as Other have

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

not been uniform. Racism involves a complex set of relations that gives rise to a variety
of responses.

At the time of the British colonisation, the legitimacy of terra nullius relied on a
representation of the Indigenous population as ‘uncivilised’. Identifying the Indigenous
population in this way is precisely what enabled the British to acquire the territory
without negotiating a treaty. This representation has continued as part of the colonis-
ing process. It is through the mobilisation of this stereotype that the control and
management of the Indigenous population has been legitimised and justified. As
Anderson states:

In the pre-federation era this form of power was intertwined with the creation of a
particular form of knowledge about Aboriginal people. The ‘authentic’ Aborigine was
how the invaders conceived the inhabitants of the other side of the frontier—as the
reciprocal ‘other’ to ‘civilised’ Europe. (1993-1994: 10)

This ‘authentic’ Aborigine was a mythical construction, a stereotype, which was
both noble and in harmony with nature, but also wild and savage (Anderson 1993-
1994: 10). Similar representations of Aboriginality within dominant or mainstream
Australia today continue to marginalise and disempower Indigenous people. For
example, Warren Mundine (President of the Australian Labor Party in 2006)
claims that ‘there seems to be buried in every government policy of every major
political party this basic idea of preserving a mythical noble savage ideal of
Indigenous Australia’. He adds that such constructions of ‘authenticity’ work to
maintain Aboriginal disadvantage (2005; see also Maddison 2013). Furthermore,
Marcia Langton (1996) has discussed how constructions of the notion of ‘wilder-
ness’ in conservationist rhetoric replicate arguments about terra nullius by depict-
ing a territory untouched by people. Once again, this represents Indigenous people
as non-people.

The construction of an ‘authentic’ Aborigine (as opposed to the ‘civilised’ European)
has been central to the politics of indigeneity throughout Australia’s colonial history.
It has been based on essentialist notions of race and culture (see Chapter 5), whereby
certain biological or cultural characteristics are seen as the essence of Aboriginal peo-
ple (Anderson 1993-1994: 10-11). A ‘real’ Aborigine has been thus viewed as one who
practised a ‘traditional’ culture and could demonstrate his or her authenticity in terms
of ‘blood ties’.

There are a number of problems with this conceptualisation of an ‘authentic’ or
‘traditional’ Aboriginal ‘culture’ based on a racial and/or cultural essence. First, it is
based on a number of myths. These include the myth of the existence of discrete races,
the myth that Aboriginal culture is ‘simple’ and ‘primitive’, and the myth that cultures
are static, discrete, bounded wholes. In order to assert an ‘authentic’ Aboriginality it
is necessary to identify a list of cultural practices/traits derived from an ‘original’ or
‘pure’ cultural form. Further, it homogenises Aboriginal culture, denying the hetero-
geneity of Aboriginal cultures throughout Australia, and denies the multiplicity of

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES @

identities as articulated by Holland, McNamara and Pearson. In other words, it con-
structs Aborigines as an ‘undifferentiated Other’, a strategy that has been an ancient
and universal feature of racism (Reid & Holland 1996: 127). These myths contribute
to the maintenance of racism in Australian society and support the belief that
Aboriginal culture is ‘lost’ or ‘diluted’ as a consequence of ‘assimilation’. The notion
of an ‘authentic’ or ‘pure’ Aboriginal culture denies the possibility of dynamic and
different Aboriginalities in the context of mixed ancestry and urban residence. Such
a conceptualisation ‘fits’ an assimilationist ideology, in which it is expected that ‘real’
Aborigines and ‘authentic’ Aboriginal culture will ‘disappear’.

However, Aboriginal culture has not disappeared. On the contrary, Aboriginal
identity has strengthened and grown in urban contexts. Initially this growth was
‘explained’ by the argument that people described as ‘half-castes’, ‘mixed bloods’ or
‘hybrids’ were clinging to parts of their ‘traditional’ culture. From a sociological per-
spective, however, it is more useful to view culture as ‘a living response to stable or
changing conditions’ (Cowlishaw 1988b: 74) than as an exotic, unchanging ‘tradi-
tion’. Thus, Indigenous struggles to define Aboriginality can be viewed as ‘cultures of
resistance’. Cowlishaw argues that Aborigines throughout the country are claiming
the right to define for themselves what it is to be Aboriginal. This is taking place in
the context of “embattled situations’ leading to the ongoing creation of new Aboriginal
cultures. Clearly, the answer to the question ‘Who is an Aborigine?’ is an important
one because of the political, economic and ideological positions of Aborigines today
(Cowlishaw 1988b: 77).

Like all identities, then, Aboriginality has both a subjective and an objective
dimension. It is the complex sum of how people define themselves, as well as how
they behave and how they are defined by others. The difficulties associated with
asserting an identity from a position of marginality should not be underestimated. As
we have seen, Aboriginal identities have been constructed and legitimised by the
members of the dominant group throughout our colonial history. Thus, the non-
Indigenous gaze has been historically significant to Aborigines in their own construc-
tions of themselves (Maddison 2013). This remains true today despite the increased
confidence with which Aborigines are asserting their own definitions of themselves.
In contemporary Australia, contests about ‘what constitutes an authentic Aborigine’
are ‘played out between Aboriginal people, between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
people, and between Aboriginal people and the state’ (Maddison 2013: 289) and, as
Marcia Langton has noted, these contests have become fraught and toxic’ (2012 cited
in Maddison 2013: 289).

li DEMOGRAPHIC AND SOCIAL PROFILE LO4 Describe the

demographic and

The 2011 Census identified 669 881 people of Indigenous origin in Australia (Table 3.1), social profiles of
representing an increase of 21 per cent between 2006 and 2011. This was almost double “'9enous Australians
the rate of increase between 2001 and 2006 (ABS 2013a). The Australian Bureau of

Statistics notes that ‘[s]ince the 1971 Census ... there has been a clear upward trend in

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Indigenous population by states and territories, Australia, 1991, 2006 & 2011
STATE OR TERRITORY 1991 2006 2011
% OF TOTAL

NUMBER POPULATION
New South Wales 101 493 152 685 208 476 2.9
Victoria 22 625 33/517 47 333 0.9
Queensland 95 671 144 885 188 954 4.2
South Australia 19 775 28055 37 408 2.3
Western Australia 49 632 70 966 88 270 3.8
Tasmania 12 462 18415 24 165 4.7
Northern Territory 46 431 64 005 68 850 29.8
Australian Capital Territory 2727 4 282 6 160 IZ
Australia 350 985 517 043 669 881 3.0

Note: (a) Includes other territories.

Sources: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009) Experimental Estimates and Projections, Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Australians, 1991 to 2021, Cat. No. 3238.0, Canberra, ABS; Australian Bureau of Statistics
(ABS) (2013b) Estimates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, June 2011, Cat. No. 3238.0.55.001,
Canberra, ABS. © Commonwealth of Australia.

the counts of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in each successive Census’
(2013a). This increase cannot be accounted for entirely in terms of natural increase.
Rather, it indicates that there are now more people wishing to identify themselves as
Indigenous, Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander than in the past (Earle & Fopp
1999: 349; ABS 2006: 5; ABS 2013a). This number constitutes 3 per cent of the total
population of Australia (ABS 2013a).

Indigenous people are located at the bottom of the ethnic stratification system.
Their socioeconomic status is without doubt the worst of any identifiable group in
Australia (Habibis & Walter 2009). Table 3.2 provides a snapshot of socioeconomic
outcomes for Indigenous Australians using a range of social indicators (briefly dis-
cussed below).

Since the Hawke government in the 1980s, successive Australian governments
have developed policies aimed at reducing Indigenous disadvantage in areas such as
health, housing, education and employment (Altman 2009: 4). Since the Rudd
government’s belated apology to Indigenous Australians in 2008 (Rudd 2008), this
policy agenda has become known as ‘Closing the Gap’ (CTG) (Altman 2009). While
a number of socioeconomic outcomes have improved for Indigenous Australians
between 1971 and 2006, Altman et al. (2008: 4) also show that ‘where there is conver-
gence between Indigenous and non-Indigenous statistical outcomes, in many indica-
tors it will take decades—even over a century—before gaps are eliminated’. In the
context of these findings, Altman provides a strong critique of the CTG framework
(Altman 2006, 2009) and proposes an alternative way of thinking that values differ-
ence as well as equality.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES @

Socioeconomic outcomes for Indigenous Australians, 1971-2011

VARIABLE 1971 1981 1991 2001 2006 2011
Unemployment rate (% labour force) 9.0 24.6 30.8 20.0 15.6 17
Employment to population ratio (% adults) 42.0 35.7 37.1 41.7 43.2 46
Labour force participation rate (% adults) 46.1 47.3 535 52.1 Bud 55
Private-sector employment (% adults) 29.7 17:2 20.5 22.9 32.8 N.A.
Median weekly personal income (A$ 2006) N.A. 2175 244.8 246.7 267.4 362
Median weekly household income (A$ 2001) N.A. 784.9 TSLT 913.2 1072.7 991
Home owner or purchasing (% population) 26.1 19.7 19.1 26.8 30.0 36
Household size 46 4.1 4.0 3.4 3.4 3:3
Never attended school (% adults) 22.7 10.7 5,11 312. 27 N.A.
Attending educational institution (% 15-24-year-olds) N.A. N.A. N.A. 33.4 34.4 NA.
Post-school qualification (% adults) 3,2 5.0 9.5 18.2 23.8 N.A.
Population aged over 55 years (%) 73 64 6.2 6.7 8.2 N.A.

TABLE 3.2 Sources: ABS Census of Population and Housing 1971, 1981, 1991, 1996, 2001, 2006, cited in Altman et al. (2004:
11) and Altman et al. (2008: 23); Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012a) Labour Force Characteristics of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, Estimates from the Labour Force Survey, 2011, Cat. No. 6287.0.
Canberra, ABS; Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012b) Census of Population and Housing: Characteristics
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, 2011, Cat. No. 2076.0. Canberra, ABS: Australian Bureau of
Statistics (2014) Census Media Fact Sheet—Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples—Australia (2011 and
2006), <http://www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home/mediafactsheetsfirst?opendocument&
navpos=620>. © Commonwealth of Australia.

As Altman states:

Indigenous development policy faces the complex task of balancing the often incompatible
goals of socioeconomic equality for Indigenous citizens, and the recognition of difference,
choice and self-determination for first Australians as ‘special’ citizens. Balancing the
need for a framework based on equality and difference is currently beyond the capacity
of the Australian state, where the dominance of the quality approach based on neo-
liberal principles of individualism and unfettered economic growth is overpowering
a subordinate culturalist discourse that values diverse life-worlds and resistance to
transformation and homogenisation. (Altman et al. 2009: 1)

As we noted at the beginning of this chapter, the latter approach may well lead to
the application of different indicators of health and wellbeing to Indigenous
Australians than the socioeconomic indicators that are routinely applied to main-
stream Australia, since the latter ‘only reflect the dominant society’s norms’ (Altman
2009: 1). (See In Focus 3.1.)

The labour market

Relative labour force participation rates have improved among Indigenous Australians
since 1971 (Altman et al. 2009: 242). In the 2011 Census, Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people recorded a labour force participation rate of 55 per cent (ABS 2012a).
However, Indigenous people suffer high rates of unemployment; this is particularly the
case for youth and women (Collins 1996: 79). In addition, the recessions of the 1980s

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIA AND THE ENVIRONMENT
The former Director of the Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research at the Australian
National University, Professor Jon Altman, has spent many years conducting research on
Indigenous Australians, analysing Indigenous policy and addressing issues relating to
Indigenous disadvantage. While many of his papers draw on economics and provide useful
statistics, as an anthropologist of development he critiques many aspects of neo-liberal
individualism and market economics and offers alternative views on Indigenous Australia
to those typically articulated in mainstream discourse. In his paper The Future of Indigenous
Australia (2006), Altman argues that the commonly held view that Indigenous Australians
only have a choice between ‘market engagement’ and ‘welfare dependence’ is a false
one. On the contrary, he argues that policy makers need to shift their thinking ‘to a new,
different ... way that focuses on Indigenous livelihoods and the recognition of new forms of
property’ (Altman 2006: 2).

This new approach begins by acknowledging the fact that about 25 per cent of Australia’s
Indigenous population (120 000 people) live on the Indigenous estate in remote and very
remote Australia (that is, about 20 per cent of the Australian landmass). They live in about
1200 discrete communities that average about 100 people each. Altman argues that in these
parts of Australia ‘there is a need for a fundamentally different form of economy... the
hybrid economy, which includes state, market and customary (or non-market or Indigenous)
sectors, not just the free market’ (2006: 3). His alternative way forward focuses on some of the
opportunities that could be developed (to the benefit of all Australians—that is, Indigenous
and non-Indigenous) in such a hybrid economy. Many of these opportunities involve the
delivery of environmental services that are in the national interest. He cites some examples,
as discussed next.

In 1979/80 a project was undertaken among a group of Kuninjku people in Arnhem Land that
involved harvesting wildlife. Altman notes that ‘this customary (and non-market) activity was
productive, enhanced people’s well-being, but also assisted in the management of feral animals’
(2006: 3). Further research in 2002 and 2003 showed that the harvesting of native wildlife among
this group of people was highly sustainable.

In 2004 the Australian government’s initial response to reported high levels of harvesting
turtle and dugong among Indigenous Australians was to close the customary fisheries. At
the time there was no acknowledgement of the ‘numerous other human interventions that
impact on these iconic and globally endangered species: boat strikes, by-catch, loss of seabed
grass (possibly linked to global warming), loss of nesting sites for turtles and eggs (owing
to environmental changes and feral pigs)’ (Altman 2006: 3). Since then a pilot project was
initiated to ‘engage Indigenous people in managing these waters and their resident species’
(2006: 3).

At the same time, in the West Arnhem Land Fire Abatement (WALFA) project, traditional
owners are using Indigenous knowledge and customs with modern equipment to reduce
wildfires and the associated generation of greenhouse gases. It is expected that this form of
fire management will generate an estimated 100 000 tonnes of abated carbon emissions per
annum and will have a positive impact on biodiversity maintenance in the region (Altman
2006: 3).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e

a_ =

noecnTon


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA'S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES

These activities are good examples of environmental management that is in the national
interest. On this basis, Altman argues that the government should ‘pay for the provision of
environmental services on the Indigenous estate—as now occurs on the conservation estate
and even on the pastoral estate—for stewardship’ (2006: 4). He points out that while this
occurs routinely in Europe, it does not occur in Australia. He concludes:

Such a path will recognise the important role of the customary sector and the regional,
national and global contributions of enhanced Indigenous activity in biodiversity
conservation, species and environmental management, and in carbon abatement and
sequestration associated with effective fire management and healthy wooded landscapes.
Such a new pathway will perhaps promote a different perception in the national
imaginary of the worth of Indigenous people living on country, maintaining the 20 per
cent, and expanding, portion of the Australian continent that now constitutes the
Indigenous estate. (2006: 5)

Q: Altman argues that adopting this alternative way forward would be relatively
straightforward if Australia were a third-world nation with little state intervention,
‘because current best practice development thinking is very livelihoods-focused,
participatory, and bottom up’ (2006: 3). Identify some of the factors that make
the acceptance of such approaches difficult with respect to Australia’s Indigenous

populations. How could these be addressed?

and 1990s had a particularly negative effect on the Indigenous labour force (Altman
et al. 2009: 231). In 2011, the unemployment rate for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people was 17 per cent (ABS 2012b). When examining official unemployment
rates it is worth noting that these tend to underestimate the extent of unemployment.
This is because official statistics do not include the ‘hidden unemployed’, the ‘discour-
aged job-seekers’ who are said to have left the labour market. (See Chapter 10 for a
discussion of the labour market.) As labour market opportunities are particularly poor
for Indigenous people in rural and remote areas, it is not surprising to find that they
have a high rate of hidden unemployment (Miller 1993, cited in Collins 1996: 80).
Participation by Indigenous people in the Community Development Employment
Projects (CDEP) (known as ‘work for the dole’) complicates the analysis of Indigenous
labour force status because it is regarded as employment for official statistical purposes
(Altman et al. 2009: 232). In 2002 there were 34 200 Indigenous people, or 18 per cent
of all Indigenous people, classified as employed, participating in these schemes
(HREOC 2005: 13). With the CDEP’s decline, by the 2006 Census it employed fewer
than 7.7 per cent of Indigenous adults (Altman et al. 2009: 232). If these people were
counted as unemployed, it is estimated that the Indigenous unemployment rate would
be about 40 per cent—that is, over four times the Australian rate (Altman 2001: 137).
At the same time, however, there has been a greater increase in private sector employ-
ment among Indigenous Australians than other Australians, especially between 2001
and 2006 (Altman et al. 2009: 233).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Indigenous workers are underrepresented in skilled occupations (including cleri-
cal, administrative, managerial and professional) and overrepresented in the unskilled
occupations (labourers and related workers). This has led Collins (1996: 83), in his
analysis of labour market segmentation in Australia, to argue that Aboriginal labour
constitutes a completely different segment of the Australian labour market.

Education

The poorer educational performance of Indigenous people when compared with
non-Indigenous people partly explains their weaker position in the labour market.
In 2003 retention rates from Year 10 to Year 12 for Indigenous students was
45.7 per cent, compared with 77.7 per cent for non-Indigenous students (Department
of Education, Science and Training, DEST 2003). In 2011, 25 per cent of the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population had completed Year 12 or equiva-
lent, compared with 49.2 per cent of the total Australian population (ABS 2014).
This means that Indigenous students are also underrepresented in higher education
in Australia: they comprise 1.2 per cent of higher education students (ABS 2002:
112) and ‘proportionally far fewer Indigenous people secure degrees than other
Australians’ (Altman et al. 2009: 235). (See Chapter 6 for a discussion of educational
inequality in Australian society.)

Improvements have been steadily taking place in the educational attendance and
performance of Aboriginal people. Altman et al. (2009: 237) note that there has
been ‘an unambiguous improvement (in both relative and absolute terms) ... in all
the educational outcomes’. In particular, Indigenous Australians have ‘experienced
a very small relative improvement in the incidence of post-school qualifications’
(2009: 235) and almost all Indigenous children now attend school at some stage. In
2011, 61 per cent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged 15 to 17 years
were attending secondary school, up from 53 per cent in 2006 (ABS 2012b). As a
consequence, concerns have now shifted from attendance to retention rates and the
quality of schooling and outcomes for Indigenous students (Altman et al. 2008: 15;
Biddle 2009, 2010). Nevertheless, it has been argued that ‘indigenous people in
remote areas of Australia will be locked into education inequality for decades to
come unless governments embrace radically different ways of providing education’
(Ford 2013: 83).

Income

Given the labour market experiences and educational backgrounds of Indigenous
Australians, it is not surprising to find that they have average incomes well below
those of the non-Indigenous population. In 2001 the median gross weekly income was
$226 for Indigenous people and $380 for non-Indigenous people. The disparity had
grown over the previous decade (HREOC 2005: 12). Median personal income has
gradually increased for the Indigenous population since 1981 but not as consistently
as for other Australians (Altman et al. 2009: 233). In 2011, the median personal

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES @

income for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people was $362 and $577 for the
total Australian population (ABS 2014). In addition, there is a high rate of welfare
dependence among the Indigenous population which is one of the main causes of
‘poverty entrapment’ among Indigenous people (Altman 2001: 138). While there have
been increases in private sector employment among Indigenous Australians in recent
years, Altman et al. (2009: 233) note that ‘the financial benefits of recent macro-
economic growth over the past 10 years seem to be accruing disproportionately to the
non-Indigenous population’.

Housing

Low incomes and welfare dependence make the likelihood of home ownership much
lower for Indigenous people than for non-Indigenous people (Altman 2001: 139). In
2006, 59 per cent of Aboriginal households were renting, compared with 26 per cent
of non-Indigenous Australian households (HREOC 2008: 301-2). The proportion of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who own their own home has increased
from 27 per cent in 1996 to 29 per cent in 2006 (AIHW 2008: x) and 36 per cent in
2011 (ABS 2012b). Aboriginal dwellings have also been viewed as overcrowded. In
2006, Indigenous adults were five times more likely to live in overcrowded homes
than other adults (AIHW 2008: x). The average Indigenous household contained 3.4
persons, compared with 2.6 persons in non-Indigenous households (HREOC 2008:
301). However, it should be noted that Aboriginal households are characterised by a
considerable flux in membership (Smith 1991: 12). Importantly, however, the abso-
lute size of Indigenous households has declined substantially since 1991, moving
closer towards the non-Indigenous average size (Altman et al. 2009: 234).

In 1992 it was estimated that over 30 per cent of the Aboriginal population were
homeless or lived in inadequate accommodation, the latter referring to inadequate
water and washing facilities, poor sanitation and sewage disposal, limited food storage,
and inadequate facilities for food preparation (NHS 1992: 88). Importantly, in 2008 the
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare reported that ‘the proportion of the popula-
tion living in discrete Indigenous communities that were connected to a town water
supply almost doubled between 2001 and 2006 (from 17% to 30%)’ (AIHW 2008: x).

Health

The Indigenous population suffers high rates of malnutrition as an effect of poverty.
Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders suffer high rates of ear disease, acute rheu-
matic fever and rheumatic heart disease, and end stage renal disease (AIHW 2008:
ix-x). It has also been noted that Indigenous Australians die from endocrine, nutri-
tional and metabolic diseases (especially diabetes) at rates up to 12 times that of the
wider population (Gray & Saggers 1999: 59). Significantly, many of these conditions
are related to poor nutrition, poverty, substandard housing conditions and lack of
health support services (Sargent et al. 1997: 241). Furthermore, while infant mortality
rates have declined considerably in recent years (by 47 per cent between 1991 and

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO5 Recognise the
existence of racism

in Australian society
and discuss how
reconciliation requires
the construction

of a‘new’ dialogue
between Indigenous
and non-Indigenous
Australians

2006) (AIHW 2008: ix), the same is not true of adult mortality rates, which have
tended to remain constant. The decline in infant mortality rates is a direct result of
strategies that have been implemented to address infant morbidity and mortality.
This indicates, however, that much more could still be done to address levels of mor-
bidity and mortality among Indigenous adults.

Since the 1970s a number of reports have highlighted the need to tackle
Aboriginal health as a structural issue, and to empower Aboriginal people to man-
age these problems as communities (House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Aboriginal Affairs 1979; National Aboriginal Health Strategy (NAHS) Working
Party 1989; NHS 1992). Thomson agrees that structural factors are important in
addressing the health of Indigenous people. However, he also identifies other fac-
tors: these include personal and cultural factors such as traditional attitudes, beliefs
and practices, which he argues have an impact on health status (2003: 492; see also
Sutton 2001; Pearson 2006).

Indigenous people themselves have taken the initiative to deliver primary health
care. In 1972 the first Aboriginal medical service was established in Redfern, an
inner-city suburb of Sydney with a large Indigenous population (Gray & Saggers
1999: 69). There are over 120 Indigenous community-controlled health services in
Australia providing various levels of care; these are represented nationally by the
National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (NACCHO)
(Gray & Saggers 1999: 69). In addition, there are about 90 Indigenous-controlled
organisations tackling alcohol- and drug-related problems (such as sobering-up
shelters, counselling programs, residential treatment and educational programs)
(1999: 69). Nevertheless, while in recent years we have seen a number of initiatives
by the public sector and Indigenous people themselves to address Aboriginal ill-
health, there is still a very wide gap between the health status of Indigenous people
and that of non-Indigenous people (1999: 72). (See Chapter 7 for a discussion of
health inequalities in Australian society.) The level of concern about the status
of Indigenous health is such that Australia’s leading health, human rights, aid
and development organisations took the unusual step of placing a full-page open
letter to politicians and the general public in the national newspaper in December
2006, describing Indigenous health as a ‘national scandal’ (The Australian,
11 December 2006: 7).

@ RACISM AND RECONCILIATION: ‘UNEASY CONVERSATIONS’
AND EMERGENT DIALOGUES

Racism and structural inequality are the two key themes that have been presented
in this chapter. An understanding of these two processes is fundamental to any
analysis of the experiences of Indigenous people in Australia today. We have also
seen that contemporary social relations and patterns of structural inequality are the
outcome of the sociohistorical processes of colonialism and dispossession. Through
these processes we have witnessed the segregation and isolation of various sectors

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENOUS PEOPLES @

of the Australian population (Atkinson et al. 2008); we have seen the implemen-
tation of policies that marginalised and disempowered Aboriginal Australians
(Maddison 2009). Insofar as the process of colonisation continues into the present
(Curthoys 2000), the discriminatory beliefs and practices that are symptomatic of
institutional racism also continue (Paradies & Cunningham 2009). This has a
pervasive effect on social relations between Indigenous and non-Indigenous
Australians; it contributes to the segregation of black and white social life so that
non-Indigenous Australians are not truly aware of the reality of Indigenous disad-
vantage. As Atkinson et al. note:

A critical result ... has been the general ability of a prosperous, white urban community
to live its life in ways that prevent the consequences of underinvestment, exclusion and
absolute poverty being witnessed ... Aboriginal lives are out of sight and out of mind
of policymakers and white communities. (2008: 15)

Racism reinforces, and is reinforced by, both ‘myths of blackness’ (evident in
stereotypical representations of Indigenous people) and ‘myths of whiteness’ (for
example, all ‘whites’ are racist and cannot be trusted, all ‘whites’ have all the knowl-
edge) (see Reid & Holland 1996: 127; Thiele 1991; see also Kowal 2011 for a discus-
sion of white anti-racists).

According to the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation, ‘reconciliation is about
improving relations between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and other
Australians’ (1993: 3). This requires that we engage in a new discourse on the
Australian nation. For Aboriginal people, this involves ‘the assertion of control and
changing the conversation [about Indigenous Australia] away from deficit towards
one that is based on strength’ (Gorringe et al. 2011: 14) and, in the words of Anne
Curthoys (2000), we need to continue the ‘uneasy conversation’ that has begun
between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.

There is evidence of an ‘emergent dialogue’ between Indigenous and non-
Indigenous people—one that offers the possibility of new forms of interaction.
This was demonstrated by the enormous success of the Reconciliation Marches
throughout Australia in May 2000 in which hundreds of thousands of people par-
ticipated. Other areas in which a dialogue between Indigenous and non-Indigenous
Australians is increasingly apparent are: in the accord reached between Aboriginal
leaders in 2004, who agreed to work with the government to urgently address social
problems together; in footballer Michael Long’s ‘Long Walk’ from Melbourne to
Canberra in 2004 ‘to achieve a “laying down of spears and guns” (Flood 2006: 259);
in the field of popular culture, including the 2006 film Ten Canoes; in popular music,
dance and art; and in the sporting arena. Mandawuy Yunupingu, former lead singer
of the internationally renowned group Yothu Yindi, pointed out that “Music has been
at the heart of the reconciliation process since well before the “R” word came into
vogue. Indeed until recently, it provided one of the few pieces of common ground for
communication between black and white Australians’ (2001: 2).

reconciliation

The process(es) through
which Indigenous and
non-Indigenous Australians
of today acknowledge,

and attempt to reconcile,
the historical relationships
of exploitation that have
existed to the present day.
This encompasses informal
processes of reconciliation
between Indigenous and
non-Indigenous people
(‘grassroots’ movements)
as well as a formal process
established by the Australian
government.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Reconciliation also requires ‘doing things’ that affect the economic, political and

social conditions experienced by Indigenous Australians. As we have argued in this
chapter, this requires recognition of the structural foundations of inequalities of race,
class and gender. As well as practical measures it means addressing legal mechanisms
to recognise Indigenous rights. Reconciliation aims to combat racism. However, it is
important to recognise that ‘anti-racism cannot succeed in isolation from other social
struggles: it must be part of a much broader campaign for greater equality and more
democracy in Australian society’ (Castles & Vasta 1996: 16). These struggles continue
in the hope that they will deliver social justice to all citizens of the Australian nation.

CONCLUSION

This examination of Australia’s Indigenous peoples has demonstrated the existence of structural inequality

in contemporary Australian society. There are marked distinctions in the quality of life, and in opportunities

for social mobility, between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians, despite the ‘successes’ of such
individuals as Cathy Freeman. In fact, the high profile of such individual Aborigines masks the extent of
disadvantage suffered by Indigenous people as a category. This pattern of structural inequality in contemporary
Australian society is the outcome of a long historical process marked by racism, dispossession, colonialism and
cultural persistence. These sociohistorical processes not only have affected the material conditions of life for
Aborigines but have influenced issues relating to cultural identification. Disputes and conflicts have arisen over
interpretations of the meaning of Aboriginality—between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people as well as
between different groups of Indigenous people. The meaning of Aboriginality has become a highly contentious
issue in Australian identity politics. Acknowledging the existence of structural inequality and the politics of
Aboriginal identity is critical to understanding the contemporary social lives of Australia’s Indigenous people.
Tackling the issues they raise is crucial to any meaningful reconciliation in the future.

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

1.

What are the key features of ‘structural inequality’? Do Indigenous Australians comprise an
‘underclass’? Provide evidence to support your answer. (LO1)

. Discuss the positive and negative consequences of reporting statistics that compare Indigenous

and non-Indigenous populations. (LO1)

. How has the welfare state, both historically and in the contemporary context, benefited or

disadvantaged Aboriginal people? Why have some of the causes of suffering, as discussed by
Peter Sutton (2001) and Noel Pearson (2006), been overlooked? (LO2)

. It is argued that self-determination has failed to improve conditions for Aborigines over the

past 30 years. How important are policies of ‘self-determination’ for addressing Aboriginal
disadvantage in contemporary Australian society? (LO2)

. Critically assess the effectiveness of the Australian government's Northern Territory

‘intervention’ and the ‘Closing the Gap’ policy. (LO2)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENO

6. In what ways is the notion of the ‘real’ Aborigines being loinclothed nomads of the desert still
perpetuated? What dangers do you think such essentialised notions of authenticity bring, and
what are the potential consequences of abandoning essentialisms? (LO3)

7. ls it important to acknowledge the existence of multiple Aboriginal identities? Why or why
not? (LO3)

8. What factors could contribute to more Australians identifying themselves as Indigenous,
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander? (LO4)

9. Is there a case for the recognition of distinctive rights for Aboriginal people? If so, how can we deny
other disadvantaged ethnic groups in our multicultural society the same level of rights? (LO5)

10. Listen to the Kev Carmody/Paul Kelly song ‘From Little Things Big Things Grow’, which is based
on the struggles of the Aboriginal activist Vincent Lingiari, an elder of the Gurindji people who
died in 1988. Research the historical background to this song. What music by Aboriginal artists
do you listen to? Do you think popular music has been an important aspect of reconciliation to
date? If so, why? If not, why not? (LO5)

11. What steps are required to achieve a significant and meaningful reconciliation? (LO5)

PREFERENCES

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner (2007) ‘The Northern Territory “Emergency
Response” Intervention—A Human Rights Analysis’, Social Justice Report 2007, Sydney, HREOC,
pp. 197-329.

Altman, J.C. (2001) ‘The Economic Status of Indigenous Australians’, in James Jupp (ed.), The Australian
People: An Encyclopedia of the Nation, Its People and Their Origins, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
pp. 135-41.

Altman, J.C. (2006) The Future of Indigenous Australia: Is There a Path beyond the Free Market or Welfare
Dependency?, Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research (CAEPR) Topical Issue No. 9, Canberra,
CAEPR, Australian National University.

Altman, J.C. (2009) Beyond Closing the Gap: Valuing Diversity in Indigenous Australia, Centre for Aboriginal
Economic Policy Research (CAEPR) Working Paper No. 54, Canberra, CAEPR, Australian National University.

Altman, J., Biddle, N. & Hunter, B. (2004) Indigenous Socioeconomic Change 1971-2001: A Historical Perspective,
Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research (CAEPR) Discussion Paper No. 266, Canberra, CAEPR,
Australian National University.

Altman, J.C., Biddle, N. & Hunter, B.H. (2008) How Realistic Are the Prospects for ‘Closing the Gaps’ in Socioeconomic
Outcomes for Indigenous Australians?, Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research (CAEPR) Discussion
Paper No. 287, Canberra, CAEPR, Australian National University.

Altman, J.C., Biddle, N. & Hunter, B.H. (2009) ‘Prospects for “Closing the Gap” in Socioeconomic Outcomes for

Indigenous Australians?’, Australian Economic History Review, 49(3), pp. 225-51.

Altman, J.C. & Johns, M. (2008) Indigenous Welfare Reform in the Northern Territory and Cape York: A Comparative
Analysis, Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research (CAEPR) Working Paper No. 44, Canberra, CAEPR,
Australian National University.

Anderson, I. (1993-1994) ‘Reclaiming Tru-ger-nan-ner. De-colonising the Symbol’, Art Monthly, 66, pp. 10-14.

Anderson, P. & Wild, R. (2007) Ampe Akelyernemane Meke Mekarle—Little Children Are Sacred, Report of the
Northern Territory Board of Inquiry into the Protection of Aboriginal Children from Sexual Abuse, Darwin,
Northern Territory Government.

Ardill, A. (2009) ‘Sociobiology, Racism and Australian Colonisation’, Griffith Law Review, 18(1), pp. 82-113.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


N SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Atkinson, R., Taylor, E. & Walter, M. (2008) The Urban and Regional Segregation of Indigenous Australians: Out of
Sight, Out of Mind?, Paper No. 12, Housing and Community Research Unit, Hobart, University of Tasmania.

Attwood, B. & Arnold, J. (eds) (1992) Power, Knowledge and Aborigines, special edition of Journal of Australian
Studies, Bundoora, La Trobe University Press.

Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) (2001) ‘The Shame’, Four Corners, 2 September.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2002) Measuring a Knowledge-Based Economy and Society—An Australian
Framework, Cat. No. 1375.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2006) Population Distribution, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australians, Cat. No. 4705.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2008a) Prisoners in Australia, Cat. No. 4517.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2008b) Experimental Estimates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australians, June 2006, Cat. No. 3238.0.55.001, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (2009) Experimental Estimates and Projections, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australians, 1991 to 2021, Cat. No. 3238.0, Canberra, ABS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2011) Australian Social Trends, March 2011, Cat. No. 4102.0. Canberra, ABS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012a) Labour Force Characteristics of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australians, Estimates from the Labour Force Survey, 2011, Cat. No. 6287.0. Canberra, ABS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012b) Census of Population and Housing: Characteristics of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Australians, 2011, Cat. No. 2076.0. Canberra, ABS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2013a) Census of Population and Housing: Understanding the Increase in
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Counts, 2006-2011, Cat. No. 2077.0, Canberra, ABS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (2013b) Estimates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, June 2011, Cat.
No. 3238.0.55.001, Canberra, ABS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2014) Census Media Fact Sheet—Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Peoples—Australia (2011 and 2006), Census-factsheet-Indigenous-National.doc, <http://www.abs.gov.
au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home/mediafactsheetsfirst?opendocument&navpos=620>, accessed 6
March 2014, Canberra, ABS.

Australian Government (2013) Closing the Gap. Prime Minister's Report 2013. Canberra, Commonwealth of Australia.

Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) (2009) ‘Indigenous Imprisonment Rates’, Crime Facts Info. No. 195,
Canberra, AIC.

Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) (2008) Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Performance
Framework 2008 Report: Detailed Analyses, Canberra, AIHW.

Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) (2009) Measuring the Social and Emotional Wellbeing of

a Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples, Canberra, AIHW.

Es

ea

Biddle, N. (2009) Location or Qualifications? Revisiting Indigenous Employment through an Analysis of Census

4 Place-of-work Data, Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research (CAEPR) Working Paper No. 61,

Canberra, CAEPR, Australian National University.
2 Biddle, N. (2010) A Human Capital Approach to the Educational Marginalisation of Indigenous Australians, Centre
a for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research (CAEPR) Working Paper No. 67, Canberra, CAEPR, Australian
yD National University.
Billings, P. (2010) ‘Mind the Gap: Public Power, Accountability and the Northern Territory Emergency
Response’, Australian Journal of Administrative Law, 17, pp. 132-58.
Broome, R. (2002) Aboriginal Australians: Black Responses to White Dominance 1788-2001, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.
Calma, T. (2008) ‘Indigenous Health and Human Rights’, Australian Journal of Human Rights, 14(1), pp. 21-39.
Castles, S. (1996) ‘The Racisms of Globalisation’, in Ellie Vasta & Stephen Castles (eds), The Teeth Are Smiling: The
Persistence of Racism in Multicultural Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin, pp. 17-45.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENO

Castles, S. & Vasta, E. (1996) ‘Introduction: Multicultural or Multi-racist Australia?’, in Ellie Vasta & Stephen
Castles (eds), The Teeth Are Smiling: The Persistence of Racism in Multicultural Australia, Sydney, Allen &
Unwin, pp. 1-16.

Cohen, R. & Kennedy, P. (2000) Global Sociology, Houndmills and London, Macmillan.

Collins, J. (1996) ‘The Changing Political Economy of Australian Racism’, in Ellie Vasta & Stephen Castles (eds), The
Teeth Are Smiling: The Persistence of Racism in Multicultural Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin, pp. 73-96.

Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation (1993) Canberra, AGPS.

Cowlishaw, G. (1988a) Black, White or Brindle, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Cowlishaw, G. (1988b) ‘Australian Aboriginal Studies: The Anthropologists’ Accounts’, in Marie de Lepervanche
& Gillian Bottomley (eds), The Cultural Construction of Race, Sydney, University of Sydney.

Curthoys, A. (2000) ‘An Uneasy Conversation: The Multicultural and the Indigenous’, in John Docker & Gerhard
Fischer (eds), Race, Colour and Identity in Australia and New Zealand, Sydney, University of New South Wales
Press, pp. 21-36.

Department of Education, Science and Training (DEST) (2003) National Report to Parliament on Indigenous
Education and Training, <www.dest.gov.au>, accessed 12 February 2011.

Dockery, A.M. (2010) ‘Culture and Wellbeing: The Case of Indigenous Australians’, Social Indicators Research,
99, pp. 315-32.

Durey, A. (2010) ‘Reducing Racism in Aboriginal Health Care in Australia: Where Does Cultural Education Fit?’,
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 34(S1), pp. S87-S92.

Earle, L. & Fopp, R. (1999) ‘Indigenous Australians—Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders: From What Has Been
to Where Now", in Introduction to Australian Society: A Sociological Overview, 3rd edn, Sydney, Harcourt
Brace, Ch. 17.

Eickelkamp, U. (2011) ‘Changing Selves in Remote Australia? Observations on Aboriginal Family Life,
Childhood and “Modernisation”, Anthropological Forum: A Journal of Social Anthropology and Comparative
Sociology, 21(2), pp. 131-51.

Essed, P. (1991) Understanding Everyday Racism, Newbury Park, CA, Sage.

Everett, J. (1998) ‘Beyond the Colonial Construct’, in Voices from Beyond the Colonial Construct, Tasmania, Jim
Everett, pp. 1-13.

Everett, J. (2006) ‘This is Manalargenna Country: Clan Country of a First Nation’, in Amanda Reynolds (ed.),
Keeping Culture: Aboriginal Tasmania, Canberra, National Museum of Australia Press, pp. 89-103.

Flood, J. (2006) The Original Australians: Story of the Aboriginal People, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Ford, M. (2013) ‘Achievement Gaps in Australia: What NAPLAN Reveals about Education Inequality in Australia’,
Race Ethnicity and Education, 16(1), pp. 80-102.

Fox, C. (1991) Working Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Goodall, H. (1996) Invasion to Embassy: Land in Aboriginal Politics in New South Wales, 1770-1972, Sydney, Allen
& Unwin in association with Black Books.

Gorringe, S., Ross, J. & Fforde, C. (2011) ‘Will the Real Aborigine Please Stand Up’: Strategies for Breaking the
Stereotypes and Changing the Conversation, AIATSIS Research Discussion Paper No. 28, Canberra, Australian
Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies.

Gray, D. & Saggers, S. (1999) ‘Indigenous Health: The Perpetuation of Inequality’, in John Germov (ed.), Second

Opinion: An Introduction to Health Sociology, rev'd edn, Melbourne, Oxford University Press, pp. 57-74.
Gray, D. & Saggers, S. (2002) ‘Indigenous Health: The Perpetuation of Inequality’, in John Germov (ed.), Second
Opinion: An Introduction to Health Sociology, 2nd edn, Melbourne, Oxford University Press, pp. 112-31.
Habibis, D. & Walter, M. (2009) Social Inequality in Australia: Discourses, Realities and Futures, South Melbourne,

Oxford University Press.
Hallinan, C. & Judd, B. (2009) ‘Race Relations, Indigenous Australia and the Social Impact of Professional
Australian Football’, Sport in Society: Cultures, Commerce, Media, Politics, 12(9), pp. 1220-35.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Holland, W. (1996) ‘Mis/taken Identity’, in Ellie Vasta & Stephen Castles (eds), The Teeth Are Smiling: The
Persistence of Racism in Multicultural Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin, pp. 97-111.

House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs (1979) Aboriginal Health, Canberra, AGPS.

Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) (1997) Bringing Them Home, Report of the National
Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children from Their Families, Canberra, AGPS.

Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) (2005) ‘A Statistical Overview of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Peoples in Australia’, <www.humanrights.gov.au/social_justice/statistics/index.html
11/12/06>.

Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) (2008) ‘A Statistical Overview of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Peoples in Australia’, <www.humanrights.gov.au/social_justice/statistics/index.
html>, accessed 12 February 2011.

Kowal, E. (2011) ‘The Stigma of White Privilege’, Cultural Studies, 25(3), pp. 313-33.

Langton, M. (1994) ‘Aboriginality’, in David Horton (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Aboriginal Australia, Vol. 1,
Canberra, Aboriginal Studies Press.

Langton, M. (1996) ‘Art, Wilderness and Terra Nullius’, in R. Sultan, P. Josif, C. Mackinolty & J. Mackinolty (eds),
Ecopolitics IX Conference Papers and Resolutions, Perspectives on Indigenous Peoples Management of
Environment Resources, Northern Territory University, Darwin, 1-3 September 1995, Darwin, Northern
Land Council, pp. 11-24.

MacDonald, G. (1988) ‘A Wiradjuri Fight Story’, in |. Keen (ed.), Being Black: Aboriginal Cultures in Settled
Australia, Canberra, Aboriginal Studies Press.

McNamara, N. (1990) ‘Australian Aborigines: A Question of Identity’, in B. Hocking (ed.), Australia Towards 2000,
London, The Macmillan Press Ltd.

Maddison, S. (2009) ‘Australia: Indigenous Autonomy Matters’, Development, 52(4), pp. 483-89.

Maddison, S. (2013) ‘Indigenous Identity, ‘Authenticity’ and the Structural Violence of Settler Colonialism’,
Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power, 20(3), pp. 288-303.

Markus, A. (1994) Australian Race Relations, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Markus, A. & Attwood, B. (1997) The 1967 Referendum or When Aborigines Didn't Get the Vote, Canberra,
Aboriginal Studies Press.

Miles, R. (1989) Racism, London, Routledge.

Morgan, G. & Warren, A. (2011) ‘Aboriginal Youth, Hip Hop and the Politics of Identification’, Ethnic and Racial
Studies, 34(6), pp. 925-47.

Mundine, W. (2005) ‘Indigenous Freedom’, <www.bennelong.com.au/conferences/conference2005/
Mundine2005.php>, accessed 12 February 2011.

National Aboriginal Health Strategy (NAHS) Working Party (1989) A National Aboriginal Health Strategy,
Canberra, ATSIC.

National Health Strategy (NHS) (1992) Enough To Make You Sick: How Income and Environment Affect Health,
National Health Strategy Research Paper No. 1, September.

Paradies, Y. & Cunningham, J. (2009) ‘Experiences of Racism among Urban Indigenous Australians: Findings
from the DRUID Study’, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 32(3), pp. 548-73.

Pearson, N. (2006) ‘Road to Responsibility’, The Weekend Australian, 30 September - 1 October, p. 30.

Reece, R.H.W. (1987) ‘Inventing Aborigines’, Aboriginal History, 1, pp. 14-23.

Reid, C. & Holland, W. (1996) ‘Aboriginal Rural Education Program: A Case Study in Anti-racist Strategies’, in
Ellie Vasta & Stephen Castles (eds), The Teeth Are Smiling: The Persistence of Racism in Multicultural Australia,

Sydney, Allen & Unwin, pp. 112-29.
Rex, J. & Mason, D. (eds) (1986) Theories of Race and Ethnic Relations, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Reynolds, H. (2006) The Other Side of the Frontier, Sydney, University of New South Wales Press.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 3 ABORIGINALITY AND AUSTRALIA’S INDIGENO

Robbins, J. (2010) ‘A Nation Within? Indigenous Peoples, Representation and Sovereignty in Australia’,
Ethnicities, 10(2), pp. 257-74.

Rowse, T. (1998) White Flour, White Power: From Rations to Citizenship in Central Australia, Melbourne,
Cambridge University Press.

Royal Commission on Aboriginal Deaths in Custody (1991) Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody.

Rudd, K. The Hon. (2008) ‘Apology to Australia’s Indigenous Peoples, House of Representatives, Parliament
House, Canberra’, Speech as Prime Minister of Australia, 13 February, House of Representatives Official
Hansard, No. 1, 2008, Wednesday, 13 February 2008, pp. 167-77.

Sargent, M., Nilan, P. & Winter, G. (1997) The New Sociology for Australians, 4th edn, South Melbourne, Addison
Wesley Longman.

Smith, D. (1991) Toward an Aboriginal Household Expenditure Survey: Conceptual, Methodological and Cultural
Considerations, Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research (CAEPR) Paper No. 10, Canberra, CAEPR,
Australian National University.

Sutton, P. (2001) ‘The Politics of Suffering: Indigenous Policy in Australia since the 1970s’, Anthropological
Forum, 11(2), pp. 125-73.

Thiele, S. (1991) ‘Taking a Sociological Approach to Europeanness (Whiteness) and Aboriginality (Blackness)’,
The Australian Journal of Anthropology, 2(2), pp. 179-89.

Thomson, N. (2003) The Health of Indigenous Australians, South Melbourne, Oxford University Press.

Tilbury, C. (2009) ‘The Over-representation of Indigenous Children in the Australian Child Welfare System’,
International Journal of Social Welfare, 18, pp. 57-64.

Vasta, E. (1996) ‘Dialectics of Domination: Racism and Multiculturalism’, in Ellie Vasta & Stephen Castles (eds),
The Teeth Are Smiling: The Persistence of Racism in Multicultural Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin, pp. 46-72.

Vasta, E. & Castles, S. (eds) (1996) The Teeth Are Smiling: The Persistence of Racism in Multicultural Australia,
Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Walter, M. (2007) ‘Aboriginality, Poverty and Health: Exploring the Connection’, in |. Anderson, F. Baum &
M. Bentley (eds), Beyond Bandaids: Exploring the Underlying Social Determinants of Indigenous Health,
Darwin, Co-operative Research Centre for Aboriginal Health.

Yunupingu, M. (2001) ‘Blackfella, Whitefella, Making Music’, Saturday Extra, The Age, 26 May, p. 2.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4

THE USES OF GENDER

CHAPTER OUTLINE

—™ This chapter examines, and problematises, the distinctions between sex and gende!
The explanations for such distinctions made by sociobiologists and social scien
are explored. The role that socialisation plays in the development of gendered m
women is discussed, along with the implications of this for both individual mem!
of society and institutions.

M® Theimpact of feminism and the concomitant change in gender ideologies is explor
through looking at paid work, domestic labour, the workplace, the legal system,
education system and the health system.

Finally, the role of individual agency in relation to both gender identity and sexuc
discussed in terms of its capacity to effect change at both an individual and s¢

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Define the difference between gender
and sex

LO2 Describe gender socialisation and its pi

LO3 Discuss the connection between gender
and power

LO4 Analyse the operation of gender ideolo
contemporary society

LOS Explain the ways in which feminism
struggled for gender equity

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australiar


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER @

The private lives of men and women are political. There is no aspect of our lives that is
not caught up by the political. How we spend and negotiate our time in relationships
is political. How we exercise our power at work and home is political. How we exercise
our sexuality is political. How we educate is political. How we contribute to the myths
of gender is political. The very language we use is political. To be gendered is to be
political. It is not necessary to be a feminist or a member of the Christian promise-
keepers to engage in this political condition. Such associations are simply more direct
expressions of what goes on across all societies between all men and women in all
cultures— daily.

(Whitehead 2002: 148)

When you got up this morning you probably began your day, as most people do, by
choosing the clothes that will create your presentation to the world. Did you choose
a push-up bra? Did you put on the same work boots you wore yesterday? How long
did you spend on doing your hair? Your makeup? What kind of clothes did you
choose—are they girly? Are your boots too masculine? These questions are both
trivial and meaningful since their answers will say as much about you as they do about
the society you live in which strives to delineate and maintain two quite distinct sexes
and genders. Crossing from one sex to another can arouse very strong feelings indeed
in other people and this, above all, might alert you to the fact that the area of gender
is both personally and politically charged.
quemcecenieremens, in gender because, like class and ethnicity, it is a key
f you are born female, it is almost inevitable that you will

have a very different life from the one you would have had if you had been born male. sexuality

. . “Ws . . This refers to sexual activity,
The differences you experience will involve income, education, health, personal rela- which can take the form
tionships and sexuality, among other things. Although both the person on the street — fhomosexual (between
and the sociologist might agree that there are gender differences, what is much less Necualtaner mee
clear is why there are gender differences, and why contemporary societies are so seerseua between peopl
emphatically organised along gendered lines. Given that men’s life chances, on the ofthe opposite sex) activity.
whole, are so much more extensive than women’s, is there anything we can do about ew! orentation s seen as

an important aspect of an
gender to make the world a more equal place, and is this a battle worth fighting? individual's gender identity

x’ AN LO1 Define the

‘Gender’ can be an untidy term because it is often confused with ‘sex’ (on forms, for _ difference between
example), is very widely used, is strongly contested at times and its meaning varies. gender and sex
Since the early 1970s, sociologists have distinguished between ‘sex’ and ‘gender’

because the division enabled us to explore our social world more richly. Sociologists

are interested in the ways in which contemporary societies work—in questions such

as who has power and who does not, and how such distinctions are established and

maintained. Because gender and power are inextricably linked in myriad ways, and

gender is a crucial social construct in contemporary Australia, this chapter will

explore gender on the two levels on which it operates in order to create the gender

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

gender identity

The sense individuals have of
themselves as a man, woman,
boy or girl, and the degree to

regime under which we live. The first of these is the micro-level (in other words,
within individuals), and the second is the macro-level (as a large-scale structure in
society itself).

But let us begin with sex, as it is determined as a biological category at birth.

Sex

‘Sex’ is ABE ccause it refers to a person’s genitalia. If you are born with

ovaries, a uterus and a vagina, you are female. If you are born with testes and a penis, you
are male. In the vast majority of cases this is an easy distinction to make, and can be made
well before birth, through the use of ultrasound scans, amniocentesis and chorionic villi
sampling. The sex of a baby is seen as very important indeed, for two reasons. First,
people think it will determine, probably more than anything else,

Second, it is important because males generally tend to be valued
more than females (especially for a first-born child), although there are cultural differ-
ences in how significant this is. Historically, the birth of a son meant the continuation of
the father’s name, whereas the birth of a daughter did not. Today the preference can be
seen as an example of the way in which males are simply more highly valued.

But others are born with both sets of genitalia, or with partial sets, or with chro-
mosomes that differ from the usual XX for a female and XY for a male. This happens
for around one in 100 babies. Until recently, such babies were seen as problematic by
members of the medical profession, who insisted that the parents choose which sex
they wanted for their child and followed this with a series of operations to reshape the
baby’s genitalia. There was no health risk involved in such cases, but there was a social
or an aesthetic risk: it was seen as crucial to the child’s healthy development that s/he
be either unequivocally male or unequivocally female because of gender and its role
in the categorisation, socialisation and expectations of a male or a female. Following
pressure from intersexed activists and their families, it is less common now for the
medical profession to insist on categorising these babies—they are frequently allowed
to wait until they are ready to choose their own sex, or to stay as intersex.

Many other people feel what might be called a ‘lack of fit’ between their sex and their
gender identity at various times in their lives. This can be as simple as not feeling
feminine or masculine enough in particular places at particular times, or it can be more
powerful than just a transitory sense of discomfort and may lead people into exploring
the possibilities of living as a member of another sex or gender, as transpeople do.

birth (Sanger 2008: 42). It is a broad and fluid grouping that includes transsexuals,
transgendered people, androgynous people, transvestites and genderqueers. Many such
people experienced discomfort from childhood and saw gender as bifurcated:

Anything that I’ve ever done that would have sorta given an insight into my inner self my
parents would’ve said things like ‘Oh you don’t do that’ or ‘boys don’t do that’ or ‘don’t
do that, that’s sissy and things like that so you developed ... ways from the earliest ... age
to disguise how you felt inside. (Liz, transwoman, age 47) (Sanger 2008: 46)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER @

Others are interested in moving right away from the binary system we are used to
and developing more diversity in the ways each person can experience gender:

Id really like everyone to just be able to, if someone doesn’t feel male, female, feels
both, feels something else, it would be nice if there was some representation of that.

Or alternatively there was no representation of gender and everyone was just a person.

aes (Sam, genderqueer, age 24) (Sanger 2008: 48)

As we will see later in the chapter, gender is inscribed not only in individuals, but
, so Sam’s hope of a gender-free world is

unlikely to eventuate. But we can also see from these examples that when it comes to
sex and gender, things might not be as simple as they first appear.

Gender

But let us look in more detail now at this term ‘gender’. What does it mean?

If ‘sex’ means what kind of body you have, ‘gender’ refers to what your society
“makes of that fact, what it expects of you as a man or a woman,

So, sex is biological, while gender is socially
constructed.

Every society, in its own way, tends to think men and women are naturally dif-
ferent. Every historical epoch has a set of characteristics which seem normal for
women and men. But what is very interesting is that each culture, at each point in
history, believes its own particular brand of masculinity and femininity to be nor-
mal and natural. For example, it would have been unthinkable a hundred years ago
for men to be sex workers or beauticians, or for women to serve in combat roles in
the armed forces, or become a brain surgeon. Today these are seen as quite normal

things to do
ae. our bodies or hormone levels have altered,

. In the 19th century, for example, it was thought that feminin-
ity was produced by certain organs (the ovary and clitoris among them). Since the
start of the 20th century, sociobiologists have mainly argued that the source of
gender is hormone levels (Hoberman 2005). On the other hand, if this were the
case, it would be relatively simple to change someone’s gender identity by simply
injecting them with a specific hormone, or mix of hormones. Again, it is clear that
genetic material and hormone levels in populations change extremely slowly
through evolution, whereas society can change very quickly indeed. This lends
weight to the argument that it is society that produces change in populations rather
than anything else. Furthermore, different communities within the same societies
have different attitudes towards gender, with some ethnic communities, for exam-
ple, favouring quite fluid gender roles while others prefer rigid gender boundaries.
Although it is routine to find sociobiological arguments being mounted which insist

that men’s and women’s differences are profound and inherent, these a

masculinity

The characteristics attributed
to men ina particular society.
In contemporary Australia,
these include rationality,
competitiveness,
heterosexuality, objectivity,
independence and
unemotionality.

femininity

The characteristics attributed to
women in a particular society.
In contemporary Australia,
these include passivity,
nurturance, subjectivity,
sensitivity and dependence.

sociobiologists

Those engaged in the field of
scientific research, which
attempts to explain social
behaviour through the use of
genetic or evolutionary
evidence.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO2 Describe gender
socialisation and its
purpose

gender socialisation
The process by which young
boys and girls are tau

x. This
process can involve providing
(dolls for girls

or trucks for boys), givin
children arec RR

(‘girls shouldn't do that’),
encouraging girls to take care of

their appearance and boys not
to care how they look,

and reed a

Some writers go further:

The US psychologist Janet Hyde (2005), the leading authority on gender difference
research, points out that the pop-psychology doctrine of natural difference is harmful
to children’s education, to women’s employment rights and to all adults’ emotional
relationships. Clearly we need better ways of thinking about differences and bodies.
(Connell 2009: 50)

Let us now move on to the two dimensions of our gendered lives—the individual
(or micro), and the societal (or macro) level—and explore the ways in which they fit
together.

@ AT THE INDIVIDUAL LEVEL

When a woman is pregnant, one of the first questions she is asked is whether or not
she'll discover the sex of the baby before it’s born because it helps the woman and her
family and friends better prepare for the baby. It also enables her to prepare the nurs-
ery and the . Any visitor to a
maternity ward in a hospital will notice that the bassinet is colour-coded—pink for a
girl and blue for a boy. Teddy bears, name cards, clothes and blankets will announce
the child’s sex. This is necessary because it is hard to tell male and female babies apart
with their clothes on. Parents whose children are intersex often mention this as being
a tense time, and in the past their decision to opt for sex-assignment surgery was in
part a response to comfortably answering questions about the sex of their child.
From the moment of birth, begins. Boys will be handled,
talked to and treated in such a eer ee Girls will be handled,
talked to and treated in such a way as to develop femininity (Nayak & Kehily 2013).
We know th

For example, a
‘female’ baby will be comforted if ‘she’ cries, whereas a ‘male’ baby is much more
likely to be left alone in order that ‘his’ lungs can develop. This is not necessarily a
conscious process on the part of the adults interacting with the babies but a process
which, nevertheless, brings the right results: robust boys and more vulnerable girls.
As these babies get older, the socialisation process intensifies. It is carried out by a

number of different agents:

the child’s family and friends, and
‘the media (among others) all play a role in the nee —— at

socialised child. Children will be given ‘sex-appropriate’ toys, which will introduce
them to the skills needed in later life and the behaviour expected of them. Boys will
be given trucks, action figures and computer games, which introduce them to the
qualities of aggression and violence. Girls are much more likely to be given dolls, and
computer games that focus on caring for animals or families. Clearly, there are also
toys that are not so sex-typed, such as bikes and drawing materials. But even bikes are
given powerful gender markers: for example, shopping baskets and ribbons for girls.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER @

Each sex is also introduced to activities that are gendered: boys might be shown how

to fix a bike, girls to cook. Their clothing will be different, with boys’ clothing fabric
being more robust and less likely to show dirt and girls’ clothing more physically
“restrictive, made from weaker fabrics and in colours that do show dirt. So it is that
girls find themselves being changed and washed more often and discouraged from
engaging in play likely to damage their clothing. There is also growing concern about
the sexualisation of young girls’ clothing, which can include such things as padded
bras for girls as young as six. The adults around the child—whether they are aware of

it or not . A boy will be
when he hurts himself, or for not showing fear. A girl will be

. These are just a few of the ways in
early childhood in which children are taught gender and what is appropriate behav-
iour for their sex.

At a young age, then, children know what sex they are and know (generally) what
is expected of their sex. They might still think that what are sometimes called ‘gender
markers’ (for example, hairstyle or clothing) determine your sex, rather than genitals,
but they do have a strong sense of gender (Franklin 2012). They can also type behav-
iours as masculine or feminine: a woman or girl is more likely to cry, a man or boy
more likely to show anger.

Children are themselves engaged in this process. They are aware of the gender
ideologies that surround them but they do not necessarily adopt them unthink-
ingly. All children (like adults) negotiate their way through what can appear a com-
plex maze of opportunities, both accepting and rejecting parts of expectations. But
there is a cost for children, especially boys, who do not subscribe to hegemonic
masculinity:

Though men in general benefit from the inequalities of the gender order, they do not
benefit equally. Indeed, many pay a considerable price. Boys and men who depart
from dominant definitions of masculinity because they are gay, effeminate or simply

wimpish are often subject to verbal abuse and discrimination, and are sometimes the

targets of violence. (Connell 2009: 7)

What we have seen is that gender socialisation is an ongoing process that is done to
children, but it is also a process in which children participate. Through play, in par-
ticular including electronic games with role play (Kafai 2008), children practise and
rehearse behaviours and roles they will adopt as they grow. In essence, they try out
different gendered positions (as they see them) within the framework they have been
exposed to at home, at school and via their peers. Concomitant with this process is

7 aenoe en They respond to these discourses using the understand-

ings and frameworks they have been exposed to, and (importantly) they reiterate or
repeat the positionings that have brought them the most social success (adult and peer
approval) (Nayak & Kehily 2013) (see Figure 4.1).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

et) 3 88) Child’s individual gender map

Available

masculine Educational
and feminine context

discourses

Power
positions
explored

Home
discourses

Child’s
Media individual Peer
discourses gender discourses
identity

Source: Based on Lowe, K. (1998) ‘Gendermaps’, in N. Yelland (ed.), Gender in Early Childhood, London, Routledge, pp. 206-33.

While the ‘real’ world that the child knows contains men and women who vary
enormously in their nuanced expression of gender, the ‘ideal’ world presented to
them is more monolithic. Relating these two views is a difficult task, and one in
which both children and adults are continuously engaged. Nevertheless, as we
have seen, a good deal of effort is put into making sure that the sexes develop dif-
ferently. Without this effort, they might well mature to be rather more alike. In
other words, if children were exposed to the same activities and behaviours and had
the same expectations placed on them, they might be similar. This raises the ques-
tion, of course, of why society—and the people who live in that society—are eager
for girls and boys to be different in the ways that they are. (This question is explored
later in the chapter.)

In 1972, social scientists were beginning to explore the parameters of gender and
the behaviours people believed were typical of men and women, and which behav-
iours they thought were more positive. Broverman et al. (1972), for example, con-
ducted a laboratory study in which men and women were asked to characterise
masculinity and femininity. Interestingly, both sexes agreed on which characteristics
were male (masculine) and female (feminine). They also agreed that the masculine
characteristics were seen as better. Table 4.1 is a summary of their findings.

As you read the characteristics in Table 4.1, you will probably recognise some as
being accurate and others as not so much anymore. For example, the suggestion
that men today are ‘not at all interested in own appearance’ seems old-fashioned.
Similarly, that a woman ‘doesn’t use harsh language at all’ is outdated. Again,
whether you recognise yourself as possessing the qualities ‘appropriate’ for your sex
is debatable.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER @

Gender characterisations

FEMININE

MASCULINE

Very emotional

Very easily influenced
Very submissive

Very excitable in crisis
Very passive

Not at all competitive
Very illogical

Very home-oriented
Not at all skilled in business

Does not know the ways of the world
Feelings easily hurt

Not at all adventurous

Has difficulty making decisions

Cries very easily

Almost never acts as a leader

Not at all self-confident

Not at all ambitious

Unable to separate feelings from ideas
Very conceited about appearance
Doesn't use harsh language at all

Very talkative

Very tactful

Very gentle

Very aware of feelings of others

Very religious

Very interested in own appearance
Very neat in habits

Very quiet

Very strong need for security

Easily expresses tender feelings

Very aggressive

Nee independent

Very dominant

Not at all excitable in crisis

Very active

Very competitive

Very logical

Very worldly

Very skilled in business

Knows the ways of the world
Feelings not easily hurt

Very adventurous

Can make decisions easily

Never cries

Almost always acts as a leader

Very self-confident

Very ambitious

Easily able to separate feelings from ideas
Never conceited about appearance
Uses harsh language

Not at all talkative

Very blunt

Very rough

Not at all aware of feelings of others
Not at all religious

Not at all interested in own appearance
Very sloppy in habits

Very loud

Very little need for security

Does not easily express tender feelings

TABLE 4.1 Source: Broverman, I., Vogel, S., Broverman, D., Clarkson, F. & Rozenkratz, P. (1972) ‘Sex Role Stereotypes:
A Current Appraisal’, Journal of Social Issues, 28, pp. 59-79. Reprinted with the permission of Blackwell Publishing.

Remember, the list in Table 4.1 was constructed in 1972, which fact alone indicates
that gender is always in the process of change. Different age groups, communities
and cultures also have different perspectives on gender and different expectations of
women and men.

If we can say that gender changes over time, it follows that there are questions to
be asked about why such change occurs. Once again, it seems clear that such change
has social rather than biological origins. Changes in gender behaviour and gender
identities occur for at least three interlinked reasons: because of economic changes,

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Individual agency

So far, we have explored some of the ways in which gender is enculturated into
individuals—primarily through socialisation. One of the terms that has been used
so far is ‘gender identity’, and in this section we explore what this means for indi-
vidual people. In short, this term refers to the way one thinks of oneself as a man or
a woman, and encapsulates a notion of variability. Gender changes through time, is
expressed differently in various ethnic communities, and takes different forms in
each economic class. It is clear from these facts alone that gender is not immutable
but changeable. This is also the case among individuals, because each person can
make choices about the ways in which they will participate in dominant ideologies
about gender. How free we are to do this depends, once more, on the circumstances
in which we live. However hard it is, gender is continually contested. There have
always been individuals and social movements that recognise the limitations gender
places on both individuals and social institutions and who are engaged in trying to
change the dominant ideologies of gender in order to produce greater equality
between the two sexes.

The push to make these changes came largely from feminists, who recognised the
instrumental role gender played in curtailing the lives of women and that the future
lay with breaking down the restrictions of gender. This raises questions about
whether it is possible to change one’s gender identity after childhood and whether
such change can be under our conscious control.

It is not only feminists who answer ‘Yes’ to this question. Since the late 1970s,
increasing numbers of male writers, often borrowing from feminist analyses of gen-
der, have argued that men’s role in upholding male dominance both as individuals
and as members of a power structure should be changed. They argue that if men were
to incorporate more feminine qualities in their gender identities they would, to put it
bluntly, be happier and healthier because masculinity also has its costs:

Men who conform to dominant definitions may also pay a price. Research on men’s
health shows that men have a higher rate of industrial accidents than women, have a
higher rate of death by violence, tend to eat a worse diet and drink more alcohol, and
(not surprisingly) have more sporting injuries. In 2005, the life expectancy for men in
the United States was calculated at seventy-five years, compared with eighty years for
women. In Russia, after the restoration of capitalism, life expectancy for men was fifty-
nine years, compared with seventy-two years for women. (Connell 2009: 7)

Others have taken a more essentialist approach, which argues that modern mascu-
linity is in crisis (see Buchbinder 2013) and this is precisely because men have become
more feminised and have lost contact with their ‘true masculinity’ (McCullough 2008).
Whatever one makes of such assertions, the underlying premise of this material is that

jour. In other words, people have agency in terms of how they choose to express their

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER t 76)

gender: they can be highly masculine, highly feminine, somewhere in between or may
even actively challenge these categories (Berger et al. 2012).

Sexualities

It is perhaps in this area that issues of gender are highlighted most acutely. Like
gender, sexuality is thought to form part of our identity. Whether we think of our-
selves as homosexual, bisexual, polysexual or heterosexual, this attraction forms an
important part of the way in which we think of ourselves and the ways others think
of us. Also like gender, sexual identity is not immutable: people often change their
sexual orientation over their lifetime, sometimes more than once.

In addition, there can be a gap between one’s sexual identity and one’s sexual prac-
tice. It is common, h
other men— t (see Phellas 2012). If
sexuality were altogether natural and, unlike almost every other aspect of social life,
not constructed and controlled by wider social forces, why would these men choose
one identity yet engage in sexual behaviour that would suggest another? The answer
to this lies in the meaning sexual identities have in contemporary societies, for there
is no doubt that, like so many other aspects of social life, sexuality is inextricably
bound up with gender, and with power.

In the descriptions offered of gender so far, there has not been a discussion of the ways
in which the expression of sexuality connotes masculinity and femininity. One example
of this is that heterosexuality is often thought of as the cornerstone of masculinity. To
have sex with women (and, for some, as often as possible) is commonly thought to bring
with it a sense of masculinity, in terms of both the way a man feels about himself and the
way others see him. This perhaps explains the confusion about the gender identity of gay
men, who are sometimes described as ‘feminine’: they are perceived as feminine precisely
because they are not engaged in sexual practices with women. Similarly, lesbian women
are commonly labelled ‘masculine’ because they have female partners.

In contemporary Western societies, masculinity is inextricably bound up with
power (Berger et al. 2012; Buchbinder 2013). Does it then follow that heterosexuality
(for men) is bound up with power? The answer is probably ‘yes’. Perhaps one needs
to look no further for evidence of this than in the levels of homophobia (the hatred or
fear of gay people) found in societies where masculinity and heterosexuality are
bound together: gay men and lesbians are open to attack in the street, and are dis-
criminated against in family law, the workplace, the housing market, as parents and
potential parents, and so on.

Many feminists have argued that the f
subjugating women both individually and as a group. In this context, sexis something

that consists of penetrative sex, which is done to women. Connell (2009) calls this

notion of male sexuality ‘hydraulic’, suggesting that men do not have control over
their sexual urges or their penises—that they always desire sex, and try hard to satisfy
that desire.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@&® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO3 Discuss the
connection between
gender and power

We have seen that it is clear that there are broad structures, some formal and others
informal, which condition and constrain us as individuals: our socialisation and the
workplace are two examples of such structures. But we also live within a complex of
ideologies about gendered behaviour that operate to direct our behaviour. In this
chapter we discuss such ideologies—those that tell us males and females are different
and males are inherently superior to females in various crucial ways, for example. But
ideologies are not monoliths and are always under interrogation and contestation by
different parts of society, as we have seen. Individuals themselves can choose to accept
and reject parts of such ideologies. Men can choose to reject the hegemonic masculin-
ity that involves aggressive heterosexuality and hypermasculinity, choosing instead
more equal relationships with others. Women, also, might reject passivity and subor-
dinate relationships and opt for becoming more assertive and undertaking paid work
that involves the use of logical argument, objectivity and competition. The point
about all this is that individuals have some degree of agency in what they do. Quite
how much is another matter altogether.

Mi GENDER IN WIDER SOCIETY

... our society, like all other historical civilizations, is a patriarchy. The fact is evident at
once if one recalls that the military, industry, technology, universities, science, political
office, and finance—in short, every avenue of power within the society, including the
coercive force of the police, is entirely in male hands. (Millett 1970: 25)

Although this was written as long ago as 1970, when the issue of gender as a major
source of inequality was first becoming recognised, it is clear that today these avenues
of power are still largely in the hands of men. Many would also argue that if Millett
were writing today, she would add the media to this list as another major contributor
to gender ideology and, as a corollary, the organisation of gender itself. (For an over-
view of the development and foci of feminist theory, see Chapter 16.)

The organisation of gendered power and gender ideology were two of the focal
points of the women’s movement, which emerged in the 1970s as a grassroots move-
ment that sought to change the inequalities between men and women that were, and
still are, so apparent.

Initially, feminists looked at the workplace, the legal system, the education system,
the health system and the family (among others), and examined the ways in which
they operated—sometimes consciously and at other times unconsciously—to dis-
criminate against women and shore up male power. Alongside this analysis, feminists
took action to change these powerful institutions so that they would cater for the
needs of women as well as those of men. On one level, they aimed to ensure that there
was (to use a popular sporting metaphor) a level playing field for all in our society.
On another level, they hoped that changes in the gender identities of individuals
would follow and that the differences between the two sexes would become less
extreme, producing eventually a much more equal society. But first, let us look at the

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER &

ways in which feminists and their symphathisers tackled some of these gendered
institutions, starting with the world of paid work.

The workplace

It was through the efforts of feminists that women managed to gain the right to
work (see Figure 4.2), and to equal pay with men. Prior to this, men and women
were paid different rates for doing the same work. But in 1972, the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission ruled that “equal pay for work of equal
value’ should be implemented by June 1975. This meant that even though the
sexual division of labour might go on, the kind of work women did should not
be seen as inferior (and worth less) simply because women did it. Although this
may have been the aim of the Commission, the reality is still different as is clearly
shown in Figure 4.3. Women have found themselves to be both undervalued and
underpaid.

There is no doubt that gender socialisation, and gender itself, equips men and
women to perform particular roles in our economy by meeting labour market
needs. In the postwar period, for example, women tended to have much longer
periods working at home than they do now. It follows that women at that time
would be more strongly socialised than they are today—to be nurturant, gentle,
aware of the feelings of others, neat in habits, quiet, and easily express tender feel-
ings, to borrow some of Broverman’s characteristics. Similarly, at that time of
almost full employment, when men were largely the breadwinners, they might well
have found themselves trained to be objective, not at all easily influenced, skilled
in business, know the ways of the world, have feelings not easily hurt, make

PGS 254) Workforce participation rates, males and females, 1999-2012

85

30 || Participation rate — males
-—— Participation rate — females

755
SL  —————

70 +

&

 65\—

[=

8

or 60 5

oO

55-4 ee

50 +

45 -

MO |<. _ fF oor
Q) Xe) ~ Y Gs) Xe) © <\ <e) Q) S ts W
On CON CO Orem COn NCO IO mE COr ECOL CaS BEEN
SP Pr SF Pf re sr Fr ey Py et eS

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012a) Australian Social Trends, Cat. No. 4102.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

sexual division of
labour

This describes the split between
what is thought of as women’s
work and men’s work. Women
are associated with the private
sphere of the domestic and
tend to undertake paid work in
the sales, service and clerical
industries. Men are associated
with the public sphere and
undertake more highly
femunerated work in areas such
as the manufacturing, finance
and construction sectors and in
public life generally.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

eit s 55) Average weekly earnings, 1994-2012

1400.00

—— Male average
1200.00 -| | —— Female average

1000.00 +

800.00 4

600.00 4

400.00 -

200.00 +

0.00 —|

T ]
m % 9 Vv m © % © Vv
2 ) xe) S 8) ) S S “ \
SF LT Ff LF » »

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2008a) Year Book Australia, Cat. No. 1301.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

decisions easily, and to never cry. These are the qualities, after all, that men and
women were seen to need to operate successfully in the world, and to fit neatly into
their gender role.

But the economy changed, and the working patterns of men and women have
changed: the majority of women now work outside the home. One of the reasons for
this is that both labour market needs have altered, as have household needs. In short,
in the past 40 years there has been an explosion in the availability of enployment for
which women are seen as suited—in the areas of retail (in shops, wholesalers, as dem-
onstrators in supermarkets, etc.), in the service industry (as waiters, flight attendants,
cooks, childcare workers, massage therapists, social workers, beauty therapists, tele-
marketers, etc.) and in the clerical industry (as personal assistants, data processors,
administrative officers, customer service representatives, etc.).

In addition, during this period there was a sharp increase in the availability of
part-time work and short-term, casual employment. This kind of employment is
thought to suit the needs of women because it is flexible and can be arranged around
family needs more easily than full-time employment, although the reality can be very
different, of course. The insecurity, low pay and casualised nature of such work leads
to economic vulnerability for the women with children who are employed in these
conditions. They commonly lack the protection of permanency and the benefits that
come with it, such as sick pay, annual leave, maternity leave and superannuation. This
lack is compounded by the relatively low pay accorded these jobs and by the fact that
there is rarely anything resembling a career structure that might improve women’s
working conditions as they gain experience.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER t 76)

Women are seen as suited to jobs in the clerical, retail and services sector because
these are jobs that replicate the kinds of unpaid work done at home. To put it bluntly,
serving food to a customer in a restaurant is not very different from cooking and serv-
ing food to people at home. Similarly, the skills needed in the service industry, which
are often called ‘people’ skills, of being diplomatic, emotionally intelligent, caring and
able to liaise between others (in addition to the practical skills required), are those
thought to be most suited to women. Indeed, this is an employment pattern that is
reflected throughout the labour force for both middle- and working-class women.
Although more women than men now go to law school, for example, on graduation
they are much more likely to become solicitors specialising in family law (the least
prestigious and least well-paid) than they are to become judges, senior counsels or
barristers (which all have higher status and are very well paid). Similarly, women who
gain degrees in medicine are likely to end up as GPs working as ‘family’ doctors rather
than become surgeons. Again, this is the least well-paid and prestigious area of the
medical profession. There is a question to be asked about why it is that work that
attracts women has low status and low pay. It might well be that it is precisely because
women do it that it has low status.

Alongside this increase in demand for the qualities women are thought to possess
have been other economic changes. Among these is the imperative of a second
income to support a family; housing costs have escalated rapidly and become the
highest cost in average households’ expenditure (ABS 2012b) and the economy is
increasingly geared to consumption.

Aside from the kind of work women do, their working patterns tend to be dic-
tated by other demands. It was argued earlier that the growth in the number of
part-time, casual jobs has favoured women, but so far we have not dealt with the
question of why this suits women rather than men. One answer is that this kind of
work is fitted into the demands of a family. The average woman, if she has children,
will take some time off work while she is pregnant and while the child is very
young, often returning to the workplace once the youngest child is at school. If she
has two children, this might be as long as seven years. Once back in the workforce
she is more likely to work part-time. And she is more likely to be the one respon-
sible for taking time off work to care for the children when they are sick. Women
are also seen as responsible for looking after other ill or infirm family members,
such as parents.

It is clear from all this that there are (at least) two ways in which gender ideology— __ 04 Analyse
what it means to be a good woman—affects women’s economic lives. First, sendcr decks in
although women now routinely work outside the home, their work patterns are contemporary society
constrained by ideologies about gender; they are much more likely than men to
work in areas that reflect their ideological association with children and with serv-
ing others. These areas of work are poorly paid compared with those which men
undertake—perhaps because women do them. Second, women are more likely to
have broken work patterns if they have children, because women are thought more

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

gender ideology

Aset of beliefs that prescribes
how men and women should
behave and describes what is
seen as the essential differences
between them.

LOS Explain the ways
in which feminism
has struggled for
gender equity

suited than men to looking after small children. Again, this is arguably the result
of a gender ideology that emphasises the ‘natural’ aptitude that women have for
nurturing and caring for others. Increasing numbers of women, of course, are
parenting children alone. In these families they are even more constrained by their
responsibilities for others.

More young women than ever before now report that they do not wish to become
mothers. When asked why, they commonly cite a desire to progress in their career.
Clearly, the ways in which parenting economically affects mothers are obvious to
these young women, and they are interested in financial independence. This desire
sits alongside the aspiration for greater consumer (or ‘lifestyle’) choice related to
where one lives, and what goods and services it is possible to purchase.

The notion of women working at all has meant a shift in some of the gender
ideologies of the past 50 years. Today, rather than being seen as housewives, women
are seen as either primarily responsible for earning a part-time wage in an appropriate
field and looking after the domestic needs of other family members, or not having
children at all. Their imaginary association with the domain of the family, including
their primary responsibility for the domestic labour, has remained constant. This has
led to women undertaking a double load: doing a day’s work and returning home to
cook, clean, wash, look after children and perform other domestic duties. Why it is
that when women live with men the load is not shared can be explained primarily by
gender and by the notion that it is the role of women to do it. But this state of affairs
can perhaps explain, in part, why women are increasingly choosing to bypass this
domestic situation—to live alone or with a partner—but not to have to buy property
or have children with men. Beck-Gernsheim (2001: 289) calls these ‘risk-diminishing’
strategies, since they enable people to move in and out of relationships financially
intact—without having to surrender their financial capital or accommodate children
post-divorce (see Chapter 8).

Legislative change

Feminists lobbied to change the law to improve the way it treated women. One
result of this work was the introduction of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975, which
made it illegal for employers to choose men above women on the grounds of sex.
Also in 1975 the Family Law Act was passed by federal parliament. This introduced
‘no fault’ divorce (prior to this, divorce could be granted only if there was evidence
of cruelty or adultery, among other things) and enabled divorcing women to gain
access to 50 per cent of the marital property. Prior to this, women who had not
worked were seen not to have contributed to the economic welfare of the family and
so could not leave a marriage with anything like a 50 per cent split of the property.
As a consequence, they were forced to stay in unsatisfactory marriages or face pov-
erty (see Chapter 8).

Similarly, the law was used to compel employers to enable women with children
to work. Feminists campaigned for state assistance in some of the services women

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER t 76)

were arguably coerced into providing. Two examples of their success are the Child
Care Act 1972, which involved the federal government in both resourcing and fund-
ing child care, and the Maternity Leave Act 1973, which enabled federal public serv-
ants to return to their previous employment after the birth of children. In the public
sector, at least, maternity leave is now widely available to all women, since the
Australian Council of Trade Unions in 1979 set the standard for 52 weeks of unpaid
maternity leave in all awards. This leave is today largely accessed by women in full-
time work in the public rather than the private sector, a very small proportion of the
total, as indicated below:

m@ The highest coverage of paid maternity leave occurred in the following indus-
tries: government administration and defence (68.1 per cent), communication
services (59.1 per cent), finance and insurance (59 per cent) and education
(57 per cent).

m@ ‘The lowest coverage of paid maternity leave was found in the following industries:
cultural and recreational services (28.2 per cent), retail (20.2 per cent), accommo-
dation, cafes and restaurants (13.4 per cent) and agriculture (4.5 per cent).

(ABS 2008b)

Aside from seeking assistance in what had been seen as the private world of the
home, the women’s movement instigated a number of changes to the law that have
led to what some might see as the breakdown of the family and others might argue
is simply a widespread reorganisation of family forms (see Chapter 8). The intro-
duction of ‘no fault’ divorce in 1975 meant that more people were ending their mar-
riages. Today, it is possible to see that the increase in de facto relationships, blended
families, step-families, single-parent families, the numbers of people living alone,
the rate of divorce, the numbers of lesbian women and gay men choosing to have
children, and women choosing to have their children on their own, are all wholly or
partially a result of the critique of the nuclear family made by feminism. In addi- feminism
tion, the desire to live differently and the opportunity to do so have been brought wth gender inequaltiesin
about either directly or indirectly by the women’s movement, which campaigned to contemporary societies.
make this possible. Feminism attempts to analyse
the causes of such inequalities.
The past 30 years has also seen a significant shift in the laws related to particularly
gendered violence—to sexual assault and assaults that occur in the domestic sphere.
These changes were generated, in part, by the results from a large (2004 respondents)
random survey conducted with Australian women in 1995. This survey (see ABS 1996)
explored women’s experiences of both sexual and physical violence over the previous
12 months and the results were shocking, both in terms of the prevalence and its gen-
dered nature. In 2010, another national survey was undertaken, this time with both
men and women (VicHealth 2009: 30), and the results showed that attitudes were
changing, but very little (see Table 4.2).
Moving away from the reporting of individuals’ attitudes towards family violence,
we can easily see from statistical data that violence by men against women in

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Attitude changes towards domestic violence, 1995 and 2009

% DIFFERENCE
HOW SERIOUS IS THIS 1995 2009 BETWEEN 1995

BEHAVIOUR? (N = 2004) (N= 10 105) AND 2009 IN ‘VERY’
Very Quite Not* Very Quite Not*

Slapping or pushing partner to cause 64 29 6 53** 40 6 -11
harm or fear

Forcing partner to have sex 77 18 3 80** 17 2 3
Throwing or smashing objects near the 47 40 12 63** 32 5 16
partner to frighten or threaten them

Threatening to hurt family members to N.A. N.A. NLA. 78 20 2 _
scare or control partner

Yelling abuse at partner 24 46 28 30** 49 20 6
Controlling the social life of partner by 46 38 14 47 40 12 1
preventing them from seeing friends

or family

Criticising partner to make them feel 29 43 26 40** 45 14 11
bad or useless

Controlling partner by denying them 35 42 20 33 43 21 2
money

Stalking N.A. N.A. N.A. 69 27 3 —
Harassment by phone NA. NA. N.A. 52 40 Z _—
Harassment by email NA. NA. N.A. 47 40 11 —_—

# ‘Not serious’ is a combination of ‘not that serious’ and ‘not at all serious’.
** Proportions responding ‘very serious’ differed between 1995 and 2009 samples at p<0.01.

TABLE 4.2 Source: VicHealth (2009) National Survey on Community Attitudes to Violence Against Women, 2009, Carlton, Vic.,
Victorian Health Promotion Unit. © Department of Health, Victoria.

EON 83 VA) Domestic violence as a risk factor for disease, Victorian women aged 15-44 years

Tobacco

Blood pressure Ire atelates5

Cholesterol

Alcohol
Body weight

Physical inactivity

Intimate partner violence

Source: VicHealth (2004) The Health Costs of Violence: Measuring the Burden of Disease Caused by Intimate Partner Violence,
Carlton, Vic., Victorian Health Promotion Unit, p.11. © Department of Health, Victoria.

relationships is by far the highest risk factor to health for women, outweighing blood
pressure, smoking, obesity and a number of other factors (see Figure 4.4).

We can perhaps conclude that, although the legal system has slowly been altered
and is now more useful to women, Australian society still has a major problem with
gendered violence that is perpetrated by men against women. The cause of this

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER t 76)

WHAT GENERATES GENDERED VIOLENCE? I
The following table, from the national survey on community attitudes to violence against women, N
suggests that a number of cultural factors are involved in the production of an environment where F
violence against women and girls is perpetrated. There are four levels of influence: individual, (0)
organisational, community and societal: C

Factors U
Factors with the potential S

Level
Individual

Organisational

Community

Societal

Violence-supportive

* Childhood exposure to violence-supportive
cultural norms
¢ Support for traditional gender roles
and relationships
¢ Weak support for gender equality
¢ Age and stage of development (boys and
young men)
¢ Masculine orientation/sense of entitlement (men)
* Lower levels of education (women)?
¢ Lower workforce participation (women)?

¢ Masculine contexts such as sporting sub-cultures,
college fraternities and the military

¢ Male peer cultures

* Pornography
¢ Advertising portraying women in highly
sexualised ways

to facilitate or inhibit

violence-supportive attitudes

* Childhood exposure to violence
(negative impact greater for males)

¢ Churches and faith-based
organisations

* Criminal justice, social service and
health system practices

¢ Workplace cultures

¢ Faith-based communities

¢ Culturally specific norms regarding
gender and sexuality

¢ Neighbourhood culture

¢ Television, music, film and media
portrayals of women, violence and
gender relations

* Campaigns and social movements
addressing issues associated with
violence and gender relations

° These factors have been found to positively influence attitudes to gender equality which have in turn been
found to positively influence attitudes to violence against women. However, there is as yet no direct evidence
demonstrating a relationship between these factors and violence-supportive attitudes.

Source: VicHealth (2009) National Survey on Community Attitudes to Violence Against Women, 2009, Carlton, Vic.,
Victorian Health Promotion Unit, p.17.

Q: Read through each of these violence-supportive factors and make an assessment of their

relative importance. Should they be equally weighted in any discussion of this issue, or

are some more important than others? How might we make that assessment? Then, with

a partner, choose one factor from each of these levels, and suggest some practical ways in

which the factor could be changed to inhibit violence-supportive attitudes.

violence surely lies in the field of gendered roles, identities and ideologies explored
earlier in the chapter. Perhaps most disturbing is the fact that, despite the many shifts
in gender ideology that have been orchestrated by feminists as examined in this chapter,
the statistics related to male violence are not improving (Kilmartin & Allison 2013).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


