@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Education

As can be seen from the table in In Focus 4.1, lower education levels for women
are seen as ‘violence-supportive’, as are low levels of workforce participation. The
two are strongly linked and education became a focal point for those interested in
changing the ways in which young men and women were socialised because it was
seen as a major source of ideas about gender, influencing both the gender identi-
ties of children and, more concretely, the kinds of employment to which they were
likely to have access. The aim of feminist interventions in the education system
from the 1970s onwards was to ensure that boys and girls were exposed to fewer
practices aimed at socialising them into traditional gendered attributes and roles,
and were instead exposed to other practices that might help them develop as more
rounded individuals. It was argued that girls, especially, might then be able to
develop some of the attributes which would better equip them to overcome some
of the barriers that stood between them and equal opportunity with their male
peers. Strategies were put in place both to make it a more equitable place for boys
and girls and to widen the perimeters around what it was thought reasonable for
them to do and be like. Equal opportunity coordinators were employed to provide
teachers with the professional development they needed to transform their class-
room practices so that girls were given more attention, and to provide educational
resources that were gender-inclusive rather than designed for males by males. One
example of this was the removal of readers in which women were seen only in the
kitchen, or as teachers and nurses, with pictures of men doing practically every-
thing else. It was argued that such factors essentially restricted girls’ horizons and
denied them, at an early age, the possibility of imagining themselves undertaking
a variety of roles.

SEXTING: WHAT DO YOU THINK?

One of the issues receiving widespread attention in public conversations is sexting—the
transmission of images of private individuals which portray them in a sexual manner—
sometimes intended, and otherwise not intended. This is more prominent among teenage girls,
than it is among females of other ages.

There have been a number of court cases in Australia, and other jurisdictions, where sexting
comes under the umbrella of child pornography—if the person being depicted is under the age
of consent. This can mean that the individuals involved can find themselves designated as child

sexual offenders, even though they are very young.
Q: Looking at the following list, where do you think the law should stand? Is sexting okay?:
M™ When both the receiver and sender are under the legal age of consent, is this fair?
™ When both the receiver and sender are over the legal age of consent, is this fair?
™® Does the law need to catch up?

M™@ |s sexting an example of the pornification of our society?

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e

a_ =

noecnTon


CHAPTER 4 THE USES OF GENDER @

Special programs were set in place to encourage girls to study maths and science
(two of the ‘gateway’ subjects for entering what had been ‘male’ careers); the texts
children studied were altered in order that women were no longer portrayed as just
mothers and housewives but in a range of roles; teaching practice was amended to
increase the amount of time teachers spent with girls rather than boys, who tended to
dominate classrooms; and the sexual harassment and bullying of girls in schools
became a major issue. All these measures were aimed at making the education system
a fairer place for girls and boys so that they could at least start their adult lives with
equal chances.

Health care

Health care became an area of concern for the women’s movement because it was
seen as a male-controlled enterprise with an increasing role in women’s lives, particu-
larly in their reproductive lives. There is no doubt that, until very recently, the medi-
cal profession was male-dominated in terms of those who worked within it, but it was
also argued by feminists and others that the underlying philosophy propelling the
medical industry was patriarchal: it sought to subordinate women. Medicine was seen
to have some of the same motivations as other branches of science (such as those of
sociobiologists discussed at the start of this chapter), a desire to make gender inequal-
ities appear a natural consequence of being human. Medicine, however, had the
capacity to exercise the belief system that underpinned it on women. (Chapter 7 offers
an overview of the development and operation of scientific medicine, which is often
termed ‘biomedicine’.)

As a consequence of this, women began to question, in particular, the use of
medical technology during their reproductive years and especially during the
birth process. Their attention was given to contraceptives which were seen in
some cases as dangerous and ineffective. Women giving birth were subjected to an
increasing use of caesarean sections, ultrasounds and epidurals, and other tech-
nologies and tests that increase the power of the medical profession over the proc-
ess, and decrease the ability of women to manage childbirth for themselves.
Through the work of feminist women both in the medical profession and outside
it, these issues are being scrutinised more than ever before, and women giving
birth are given much more control over what happens to them and are attended
by midwives rather than obstetricians. These gains have not been won easily, and
are still regularly threatened by the medical profession—arguably because they
have reduced its power.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


|

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

1.

CONCLUSION

This chapter began by outlining some of the ways in which men as a group have power over women as a
group. Even the most cursory glance at statistics relating to income or the major institutions of power in
contemporary societies is enough to convince one that there is a sharp divide in the power relations between
men and women. We went on to examine some of the ways in which masculine and feminine people are
produced through both ideologies and practices which change through economic pressure, social pressure and
the agency of individuals.

Since the 1970s, when the second wave of feminism began, it has become both an area of public
conversation and, in many cases, a means to generate and analyse personal change. On the whole, feminists
have been involved in a long process, of trying to change societies in order that they become more equal
places for women and men and in changing ideologies of gender in order that they become more flexible. To
some extent, feminism has been very successful, as can be seen from the examples in this chapter of changes
made to some of the key institutions. But there is no doubt that in contemporary Australia there are still major
inequalities between women and men in terms of their income and their roles in the ‘major avenues of power’
identified by Millett (1970: 25). Women’s representation in parliament, on the boards of major companies,
on the benches of the High Court, as vice-chancellors of universities, as senior personnel in the armed forces,
and so on, is either marginal or non-existent. Many writers believe that the reason for this might not be direct
discrimination (as it used to be), but is linked to a matrix of notions about gender which individual men and
women enact in their daily lives.

We can see from this that gender, like other aspects of social life such as class, race, ethnicity and sexual
orientation, is a dynamic that determines the degree of power an individual might be able to exercise. Overall,
men have more power than women, and very masculine men even more so. Similarly, women in contemporary
societies who choose to adopt masculine rather than feminine attributes are much more likely to succeed in
a competitive working environment than those who do not. This is a situation that seems unlikely to change
in the foreseeable future, precisely because the value placed on masculinity is not likely to be altered by those
who possess it.

Do you think it is every parent's responsibility to ensure that their son or daughter is raised as
gender-free as possible? Should we attempt to raise all our children as androgynous—a blend
of the strongest elements of both traditional genders? What would that look like? (LO1)
Thinking back to when you were a small child; what is your first memory of becoming
gendered? Can you remember that moment? What was said to you? How did you feel about it
then, and now? (LO2)

Asa sociologist, how would you account for the fact that the statistics related to male violence
are not improving? (LO3)

Why are the differences in gendered power so enduring? If you had to isolate five discrete
causes, what would they be? (LO4)

It is commonly asserted that we now live in a ‘post-feminist’ society where women have gained
equality. To what extent is this true? Do contemporary girls and women need feminism? Why
or why not? (LO5)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 4 THE USES

Pnerenences |

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (1996) Women’s Safety Australia, Cat. No. 4128.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2008a) Year Book Australia, Cat. No. 1301.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2008b) Survey of Employment Arrangements and Superannuation, Cat. No.
6361.0 2008, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012a) Australian Social Trends, Cat. No. 4102.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012b) Year Book Australia 2012, Cat. No. 1301.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Beck-Gernsheim, E. (2001) Reinventing the Family: In Search of New Lifestyles, London, Polity Press.

Berger, M., Wallis, B. & Watson, S. (2012) Constructing Masculinity, London, Taylor and Francis.

Broverman, I., Vogel, S., Broverman, D., Clarkson, F. & Rozenkratz, P. (1972) ‘Sex Role Stereotypes: A Current
Appraisal’, Journal of Social Issues, 28, pp. 59-79.

Buchbinder, D. (2013) Studying Men and Masculinities, New York, Routledge.

Connell, R. (2009) Gender, 2nd edn, Cambridge, Polity.

Franklin, L. (2012) Gender, Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan.

Hoberman, J.M. (2005) Testosterone Dreams: Rejuvenation, Aphrodisia, Doping, Berkeley, CA, University of
California Press.

Kafai, Y.B. (ed.) (2008) Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat: New Perspectives on Gender and Gaming, Cambridge,
MA, MIT Press.

Kilmartin, C. & Allison, J. (2013) Men’s Violence Against Women: Theory, Research, and Activism, London, Taylor
and Francis.

Lowe, K. (1998) ‘Gendermaps’, in N. Yelland (ed.), Gender in Early Childhood, London, Routledge, pp. 206-33.

McCullough, K. (2008) The Kind of Man Every Man Should Be: Taking a Stand for True Masculinity, Eugene, OR,
Harvest House Publishers.

Millett, K. (1970) Sexual Politics, New York, Doubleday.

Nayak, A. & Kehily, M. (2013) Gender Youth and Culture: Young Masculinities and Femininities, London,
Palgrave Macmillan.

Phellas, C.N. (2012) Researching Non-Heterosexual Sexualities, Farnham, Ashgate.

Sanger, T. (2008) ‘Trans Governmentality: The Production and Regulation of Gendered Subjectivities’, Journal
of Gender Studies, 17(1), pp. 41-53.

VicHealth (2004) The Health Costs of Violence: Measuring the Burden of Disease Caused by Intimate Partner
Violence, Carlton, Vic, Victorian Health Promotion Unit, p.11.

VicHealth (2009) National Survey on Community Attitudes to Violence Against Women, 2009, Carlton, Vic,
Victorian Health Promotion Unit.

Whitehead, S. (2002) Men and Masculinities: Key Themes and New Directions, Cambridge, Polity.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e



CHAPTER 5

ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION:
CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL
IMAGINARY?

®@ This chapter critically examines the meaning and salience of ethnicity in processes of
settlement and in Australian culture and social structure. It begins by clarifying the meanin:
key terms: ethnicity, ethnic identity, ethnic group, ethnic community and ethnic minorit

™ Structural processes associated with ethnic group and community formation are exan
these are then linked to cultural processes of ethnic identification.

—™ The relationship between ethnicity, migration and nationalism is introduced and the fa
influencing the process of immigrant settlement are discussed.

® Variations in the immigrant experience are examined in terms of class, gender, age and
entry status (skilled, humanitarian/refugee, family reunion, undocumented and so « yn)
This provides the contextual background for a discussion of some key aspects of imm
life in Australia: access to the labour market, the experiences of ethnic youth, and r
hostilities towards Arab and Muslim Australians.

—™ The chapter concludes by exploring the relationship between ethnicity and national -
identity. It raises a number of questions that have important implications for Australian
society at the beginning of the 21st century. How have we come to define what it m
be Australian? How have ethnic minorities challenged and/or transformed Aust ir

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Define key terms in the sociology of ethnic
relations: ethnicity, ethnic identity, ethnic |
group, ethnic community and ethnic m

LO2 Identify the factors influencing the process
immigrant settlement and the biographi
the Australian-born

LO3 Summarise significant trends in Australian —
immigration since World War Il

LO4 Discuss the shift in Australian settlement
policy from assimilation to multiculturalis

LOS Analyse the impact of class, gender, age and
entry status on immigrants’ experiences in
Australia

LO6 Assess the relationship between ethnicity
Australian national identity

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian So


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @

At the beginning of the 21st century, Australia is often represented as a multicultural
society. The image is one of ‘unity in diversity’, but what does this mean? How, and
why, has this image become relevant in a society that once proudly boasted a White
Australia policy aimed at maintaining (Anglo) cultural homogeneity? Australia’s
postwar immigration program has contributed to the creation of contemporary
Australia as a culturally and ethnically diverse nation (see Table 5.1). Multiculturalism,
as an ideology and a set of policies, can be viewed as a positive response to this cul-
tural diversity. However, the application of multicultural policies has also received
some criticism. Does multiculturalism threaten social order by encouraging divisions
within Australian society, as some suggest? Or does the celebration of cultural diver-
sity serve to strengthen social cohesion in a polyethnic society?

Sociological answers to these and other related questions depend on an under-
standing of the meaning of ‘ethnicity’ and the ways in which ethnicity is implicated
in the lives of all Australians. We therefore begin this chapter by clarifying the mean-
ing of key terms such as ethnicity, ethnic identity, ethnic group, ethnic community
and ethnic minority.

@ THE MEANING OF ‘ETHNICITY’ LO1 Define key

terms in the sociology
. of ethnic relations:
Eth hid ty ethnicity, ethnic
identity, ethnic group,

DO YOU HAVE AN ETHNIC BACKGROUND? I often begin teaching about Australian ¢"" ninoriy. and
ethnic relations by asking my students this question. Usually those who are migrants

from non-English-speaking backgrounds, or whose parents or grandparents migrated

to Australia from non-English-speaking countries, raise their hands. These are people

who see themselves as ‘ethnic’.

WHAT ABOUT ALL OF YOU WHO HAVEN'T RAISED YOUR HANDS? DON’T YOU
HAVE AN ETHNIC BACKGROUND? A few more hands are slowly raised as people
think about the meaning of the term ‘ethnic’ and realise that ‘Anglo-Australian’ is in
fact an ethnic identity. However, these people do not usually see themselves as ‘ethnic’.

DON’T WE ALL HAVE AN ETHNIC BACKGROUND? Ethnicity is something we all

have. The process through which some people come to be labelled ‘ethnic’ and others

not is ‘political’ in the sense that it is the outcome of power relations. This is what is

involved in identity politics. In Australia, the term ‘ethnic’ has been applied to _ identity politics
political minorities who emerged as a consequence of Australia’s postwar immigration [Pl nites: senty
program—that is, ethnic minorities. These minorities are marked by their ethnicity.  thatinvoive claiming rights on
The Anglo-Australian dominant group, however, is an unmarked category. Thus, the "*>***fshedienttes.
label ‘ethnic’ is not applied to this group and the fact that its members have an

ethnicity typically goes unrecognised. The representation of Australian identity

constructed through dominant political and cultural discourses is hegemonic, and as

such ‘does not represent itself as an ethnicity at all’ (Hall 1992a: 257). However, recent

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Australia’s top 50 countries of birth, median age and estimated resident
population at 2010

ESTIMATED RESIDENT
COUNTRY OF BIRTH MEDIAN AGE POPULATION

United Kingdom, Channel Islands and Isle of Man 1192 878
New Zealand 544171
China (excludes SARs and Taiwan) 379 776
India 340 604
Italy 216 303
Vietnam 210 803
Philippines 177 389
South Africa 155 692
Malaysia 135 607
Germany 128 558
Greece 127 195
Korea, Republic of (South) 100 255
Sri Lanka 92 243
Lebanon 90 395
Hong Kong (SAR of China) 90 295
Netherlands 88 609
United States 83 996
Indonesia 73 527
lreland 72 378
Croatia 68 319
Fiji 62778
Singapore 58 903
Poland 58447
Thailand 53 393
Japan 52111
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) 49 704
Malta 48 870
lraq 48 348
Canada 44118
Serbia (includes Kosovo) 42 064
Egypt 41 163
Turkey . 39 989
Taiwan 38 025
Bosnia and Herzegovina 37 470
lran 33 696
Zimbabwe 31779
Cambodia 31 397
Pakistan 31277
Papua New Guinea 31225
France 30 631
Nepal 29 589
Chile 28 574
Bangladesh 28 179
Mauritius 27 026
Afghanistan 26 527
Sudan 26 199
Russian Federation 22 804
Hungary 22 660

Total overseas-born . 5 993 945
Total Australia-born 16 334 902

Total 22 328 847

TABLE 5.1 Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2011) Migration, Australia, 2009-10, Cat. No. 3412.0,
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Products/52F24D6A97BCOA67CA2578B0001 197B8>, accessed
March 2014. © Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @

critical analyses of ethnic relations in Australia have attempted to highlight the
ethnicity of the dominant group in order to reveal the underlying power relations at
work in the use of the label ‘ethnic’. Critics have marked the ethnicity of the dominant
group through the use of the term ‘whiteness’, recognising that the boundaries
between the dominant group and the ethnic minorities in Australia are constructed
and reinforced not only through the recognition of cultural difference but also
through a process of racialisation (for example, see Hage 1998; Schech & Haggis _ racialisation
2001; Wadham 2003; Gale 2004). neyrted nth pinay |
The term ethnicity is relatively new and, like many sociological concepts, has _ marker ofa social phenomenon.
a highly contested meaning. The term ‘ethnic’ comes from the ancient Greek term _ ethnicity
ethnos, which was used in New Testament Greek as a synonym of ‘gentile’, or non- sup af ope uno share
Christian and non-Jewish pagan (Hutchinson & Smith 1996: 4). Thus it was used to _ beliefin common ancestry.
refer to other peoples, to ‘foreign barbarians’, whereas the Greeks referred to them-  MUCueiMtanie
selves using the term genos. This dichotomy between ‘us’ and ‘them’ is also evident in purposes.
the Latin use of the term natio, which was applied to distant, barbarian peoples,
whereas the Roman term populus was applied to themselves (Hutchinson & Smith
1996: 4). It is perhaps not surprising to find that in contemporary Western societies
such as Australia this dichotomy is maintained in the discourse of the dominant
groups, which reserve the term ‘nation’ for themselves and ‘ethnic’ for immigrant
peoples (Hutchinson & Smith 1996: 5). Increasingly, however, this hegemonic use of
the term ‘ethnic’ is being challenged, and the term ‘ethnicity’ is being recoded so
that it applies to all peoples (Hall 1992a). Although there are many theories of ethnic-
ity, they all note the significance of this dichotomy between ‘us’ and ‘them’. Ethnic
identity becomes relevant only in contexts of interaction between diverse groups
(see Banks 1996). This becomes clear, for example, when you think of yourself travel-
ling overseas. Although you rarely consider your ethnic/national identity while you
are in Australia, being Australian tends to become very important in another
country—especially when you are mistaken for being English or American!
Ethnicity has a dual nature: it has a subjective and an objective dimension.
Ethnicity can be claimed by members of a group themselves, or it can be attributed to
them by others (Guibernau & Rex 1997: 8). Both processes are inherent in the making
of ethnic identities (Cornell & Hartmann 1998). Following Barth (1969), Cornell and
Hartmann (1998: 72) argue that ethnic groups and identities form in an interaction
between what others say we are and who we claim to be.
Price’s (1985: 44-5) discussion of Jewish ethnicity provides an excellent example
of the implications of these boundary negotiations. He notes that in Jewish history
there have been at least four boundaries of ethnic identification. The inner boundary
includes those who identify themselves as Jews of Jewish faith, attend synagogues for
worship and instruction, and observe Jewish law. The second boundary includes
those who are not ‘religious’ but who identify themselves as members of the Jewish
people. Both these boundaries emphasise the ‘subjective’ dimension of ethnic iden-
tification. However, the outer two boundaries are based on ‘objective’ criteria that
may not coincide with subjective identification. The third boundary takes in those

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

ethnic group

A social group whose members
interact with one another,
sharing a ‘consciousness

of kind’ and a belief in
common ancestry.

ethnic category

An aggregate or collectivity
defined in terms of a set of
objective criteria, such

as country of birth or
Nationality, that is usually
constructed for the purpose of
statistical analysis.

lifestyle

A term derived from Max Weber
that refers to a way of life.
Status groups are distinguished
on the basis of different
lifestyles.

ethnic community

An ethnic group with the
additional characteristics

of ethnic organisational
development and social closure
among members. It varies

in its level of organisational
development and in the degree
of social closure among its
members. Thus the boundaries
of an ethnic community may be
more or less permeable.

who do not identify as Jews but who, because they have Jewish ancestry through their
maternal line, could claim Jewish status under traditional Jewish law. The last
boundary incorporates those who do not identify as Jews and do not have Jewish
descent through the maternal line. Nevertheless, this boundary may still have pro-
found implications, depending on the power of those defining Jewishness in this
way. Price emphasises that this is exactly what happened to many Germans singled
out for oppression during Hitler's regime. Some did not know they had any Jewish
ancestry until the Nazi genealogists discovered this information in birth and mar-
riage records (1985: 44-5). The important point is that the criteria that determine the
meaning of ethnicity vary across time and place; boundaries can shift depending on
who is defining ‘ethnicity’.

Social interaction and identification are also key aspects of ethnic phenomena. Not
all those who share ‘ethnicity’ (however defined) establish and/or belong to ethnic
groups and communities. Thus we cannot assume the existence of an ethnic group
from the determination of an ethnic category. For example, Table 5.1 includes
210 803 and 544 171 people in the categories Vietnam-born and New Zealand-born,
respectively. It is important to recognise, however, that this demographic fact reveals
very little about the social formations that may be constructed within (or between)
categories. It is incorrect to assume that ethnicity is necessarily important to all
members of an ethnic category.

For Weber, ethnicity is a basis for the formation of status groups—that is,
groups that are distinguished from each other by specific lifestyles. He notes that
the recognition of differences in any aspect of lifestyle, no matter how superficial,
may give rise to feelings of repulsion and contempt for ‘outsiders’. More impor-
tantly, it can stimulate awareness of a common identity and feelings of attraction
among those who resemble each other—that is, a ‘consciousness of kind’. When
this consciousness of kind gives rise to a belief in common ancestry, these status
groups can be viewed as ethnic groups. Weber ([1922] 1968: 389) defines ethnic
groups as ‘human groups that entertain a subjective belief in their common descent
because of similarities of physical type or of customs or of both, or because of
memories of colonisation or migration’. From this perspective, whether those who
identify with a particular ethnic group or community are objectively of common
ancestry is not significant for understanding the development of ‘ethnic’ social
formations.

An ethnic community is based on the existence of communal ties and social
closure (Weber 1964: 137-8) through which a ‘boundary’ is formed between ‘us’ and
‘them’ (Barth 1969). For Barth, the boundary itself, along with its ‘symbolic border
guards’ (language, dress, food and so on), is more important than cultural content for
the existence of an ethnic community (Hutchinson & Smith 1996: 9). Post-colonial
theorists such as Said (1978) and Bhabha (1990) have stressed that this process of
boundary formation leads to perceptions of ‘them’ (that is, those who are ‘not us’) as
Other. Similarly, Bottomley (1997: 44) notes that ‘[t]he idea of identity as sameness

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @

requires an Other who is different, a drawing of boundaries that exclude challenges, a
refusal to recognise the dissonances within those boundaries’. In Australia, Otherness _ otherness

‘ ‘ “Ag > . tot The subject position of a set of
has applied particularly to Asians (Ip et al. 1994; Ang 2000, 2001), a homogenising scope who ae constute
category that denies the significance of cultural diversity within its boundaries. As Lo as ‘outsiders’ by the dominant

: : : : i za
(2000: 155) points out with reference to Australia, ‘Asians have for many decades been (haus RUSE Oi
typecast as a threat to the national imaginary’. More recently, people of African or  marginality imposed on those
: : < >» who do not constitute the

Middle Eastern appearance (Lebanese, Arabs and Muslims) have been cast as ‘Other’ gominant core (the centre)

in the Australian context (Perrin & Dunn 2007; Poynting et al. 2004; Poynting & _ ‘focal elations. itisan
. outcome of the political process
Mason 2006, 2007; White 2007). through which boundaries are
A number of myths surround the notion of ethnic communities. One of these is cnstiies between ‘us’ and
that ethnic community formation is inevitable and that therefore most migrants are
members of ethnic communities. This is not true. First, an ethnic community is a
particular social formation that arises in the context of specific patterns of migration
(for example, chain migration). It is the outcome of struggles for power and access
to resources, as well as resistance to racism and other exclusionary practices in the
settler society. Second, ethnic communities are often (mis)represented as homoge-
neous entities. In Australia this arises in part because multicultural policy equates
culture with ethnicity. Thus, because the members of an ethnic community share a culture
sense of belonging based on ethnicity, it is assumed that they share a common cul- tnowledge, en
ture. This perception overlooks important divisions within the ethnic community shared by members ofa
based on characteristics such as gender, age, religion, sexuality and generation (for snetiicly gender sexaty,
example, see Cohen 2004; Ndhlovu 2009). Furthermore, within Australian multicul- _ indigeneity, age or disability).
turalism the ‘culture’ that they are assumed to share is represented as ‘traditional’,
fixed and static (Jayasuriya 2008). Negotiating this aspect of Australian multicultur-
alism is particularly problematic for migrants and refugees from urban developed
societies, for whom such ‘traditional’ notions of ethnicity are far removed from the
reality of their lives.
The term ‘diaspora’ has been used to refer to the dispersed populations throughout
the world who share ethnicity and a homeland but who reside outside that homeland
(Cohen 1997). Globalisation has enabled the members of these ‘transnational com-
munities’ to be connected through electronic communication and rapid transport
(see Chapter 13). They are a good example of how changes in the relationship between
time and space have created new possibilities for social interaction (Giddens 1991).
Contemporary migration studies increasingly emphasise the significance of adopting
transnationalism as a framework when addressing questions of identity and ethnicity
(Basch et al. 1994; Hannerz 1996; Van Hear 1998; Dunn 2005). If we wish to under-
stand issues relating to ethnicity in Australia today, it is essential that we are aware of
the transnational networks that link Australian migrants to their places of origin (see
Bottomley 1992; Skrbis 1999; Papastergiardis 2000; Baldassar 2001; Inglis 2002;
Baldassar et al. 2007).
Recognising that ethnic groups and communities are involved in ongoing strug-
gles for power, prestige and control highlights another important aspect of ethnic

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

life chances

A term derived from Max Weber
that refers to the opportunities
available to people in society.
People with different
social-class locations have
different life chances, including
different opportunities with
regard to education, wealth
and health.

ethnic minority

An ethnic group that has been
assigned a subordinate position
in society.

hegemony

The domination of one group
(for example, a social class
or ethnic group) over others,
which is achieved through a
combination of political and
ideological processes.

difference. Ethnic groups and communities are distinguished not only by different
lifestyles, but also by the differing life chances of their members. Ethnic groups may
be dominant or subordinate groups. Ethnic minorities are ethnic groups which ‘have
been assigned a subordinate position in society by dominant groups on the basis of
socially-constructed markers of phenotype (that is, physical appearance or “race”),
origins or culture’ (Castles & Miller 1998: 30). Ethnicity, then, often marks the
boundaries between dominant and subordinate groups in society. Ethnic minorities
are usually, but not necessarily, numerically smaller than the dominant group. The
significant difference is in terms of the power, not the size, of the group.

Marxist theorists emphasise the ways in which ethnicity is implicated in the
construction and maintenance of social inequality. They are particularly interested
in the relationship between ethnicity and social class, arguing that ethnic relations
can be explained in terms of (but cannot be reduced to) the underlying class rela-
tions in society. For some, ethnicity is viewed as a complicating factor that pre-
vents class formation; for others, ‘ethnicity’ is viewed as false consciousness. Ethnic
divisions are dismissed as surface phenomena, distorting the ‘pure’ class con-
sciousness of the proletariat and preventing the formation of a revolutionary
working class.

De Lepervanche (1980: 35) adopts this view when she states that ‘[t]here are in fact
no ethnics; there are only ways of seeing people as ethnics’. She views ethnicity as an
ideological mechanism for maintaining hegemony and argues that the promotion of
ethnicity serves the same ideological function as the promotion of race differences a
century ago. Both are convenient to ruling-class interests and suggest that the nature
of hegemony within society is to be understood in terms of Anglo-Saxon dominance
rather than in terms of class relationships. On the contrary, she argues, Anglo-Saxon
hegemony is historically grounded in class domination and in specific relations
between capital and immigrant labour (1980: 34). On the other hand, some neo-
Marxists recognise the benefits of working-class ethnicity as a framework through
which broader class interests are managed. Ethnicity may thus denote resistance to
capitalist and imperialist exploitation (McCall et al. 1985: 13). More recently, the
problematic relationships between ethnicity and class have been explored in terms of
their intersection with gender (Bottomley & de Lepervanche 1984; Bottomley et al.
1991; Julian 1998; Song 2003; Hodge & O’Carroll 2006), race (Stratton 2009b) and
religion (Poynting 2009).

Ethnic identification

The cultural process of ethnic identification is just as variable as the structural proc-
esses of group and community formation. In other words, there are degrees of ethnic
identification. This is something that Anglo-Australians tend to recognise when dis-
cussing religious identification with respect to, say, Catholicism or Anglicanism. If
you state that you are Catholic or Anglican, it will not be assumed automatically that
you regularly attend church and that you are necessarily deeply committed to these
faiths. However, when it comes to ‘other’ religions (for example, Islam) and ethnicities

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @

(for example, Greek, Italian, Vietnamese, Lebanese), the assumption is often made
that ethnic identification is highly significant to the individual. This assumption is
questionable.
McKay and Lewins (1978) have developed a typology that acknowledges variation
in the degree of ethnic identification. They distinguish between ethnic awareness and
ethnic consciousness: ‘ethnic awareness’ refers to the situation in which an individual
knows that he or she possesses a certain ethnic trait (or traits) but this is no more
meaningful than his or her other cultural, physical, social or territorial characteristics
(McKay & Lewins 1978: 416); ‘ethnic consciousness’, however, refers to the situation
in which a specific ethnic trait (or traits) assumes considerable importance such that
it influences other cultural, social or territorial attributes and modes of identification
(McKay & Lewins 1978: 416). As well as recognising the existence of variation in the
degree of ethnic identification, this conceptualisation acknowledges the existence of
multiple identities/subjectivities in contemporary social life. As each of us interacts in
a wide range of social spheres, our identities are necessarily multiple. Ethnicity may
inflect some of these identities and not others.
Variation in the degree of ethnic identification occurs alongside variation in
the ways in which ethnicity is expressed. Herbert Gans (1979: 12) coined the term
‘symbolic ethnicity’ to refer to a form of ethnic expression that is not based on the symbolic ethnicity
existence of ethnic groups or networks. Rather, it refers to ‘feelings of identity’ based novo anen 0 Heber fans
on ‘allegiances to symbolic groups that never meet’ (Gans 1979: 12). Symbolic eth- _ otethnicexpression that
nicity is more common in third and subsequent generations of immigrants, although hater of anos
it may also be apparent among some first-generation immigrants. It is a form of _ allegiance toan ethnic culture.
ethnic identification that involves a nostalgic allegiance to the culture of the immi- [repost Mush

allegiances to symbolic groups
grant generation but does not necessarily lead to the incorporation of these cultural that never meet andis not

traditions into everyday behaviour (Gans 1979: 9). In this sense, ethnicity takes on venyaybehevban "
an expressive rather than an instrumental function.

This expression of symbolic ethnicity often leads to questions of ‘authenticity’ in
identity politics. In other words, some argue that as it is not incorporated in everyday
behaviour it is not ‘authentic’—in other words, that it characterises the situation in
which an ethnic identity is mobilised for purely instrumental purposes. Sociologically,
however, what this shows is that ethnic identity can mean different things to different
people and can be expressed in a variety of ways, none of which can be described as
more authentic than others. (See Chapter 3 for a discussion of similar arguments with
respect to Aboriginality.) Think about the ways in which the meaning of the term
‘wog’ has changed in Australian society over the past few decades. What was once a
derogatory term has now been claimed by second- and subsequent-generation
Europeans and transformed into a positive ethnic label. This ‘wog pride’ can be seen
as a form of resistance to Anglo dominance. It has emerged as the children and grand-
children of European immigrants have gained a more secure place—economically,
socially and culturally—in Australian society. The fact that wog pride does not extend
to Asians or other minorities is an important indicator of their less secure status in
contemporary Australian society (see Zevallos 2004; Sala et al. 2010).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@ AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

ethnic identity

An identity conceived on the
basis of ethnicity. It is the
product of both self-definition
and other-definition.

hybridity

Anew type of identity produced
in the era of late modernity that
acknowledges the blurredness
of boundaries between multiple
sites of identification.

essentialism

A view that there is an essential
core or ‘essence’ to identity that
is inevitable, stable and fixed
over time.

In contrast to ‘symbolic’ ethnicity, ‘behavioural’ ethnicity refers to the expression
of ethnicity in the everyday lives of ethnic group members. In this context, it is useful
to conceptualise ethnic identities as grounded in social interaction patterns. This
can be illustrated through Bottomley’s (1979) research into Greek-Australian identi-
ties. In Focus 5.1 shows the social networks for two second-generation Greek-
Australian men, Stephen and Stavros. It is clear from these two social networks that
Stavros is embedded in a dense network of social relationships with others of Greek-
Australian ethnicity. Apart from work, most of his daily activities take place with
others of Greek origin. Thus, “Greekness’ is likely to be a highly salient aspect of his
self-identification. In other words, although he has multiple identities, the majority
of these are expressed in the context of Greek-Australian relationships. Stephen’s
social network, in contrast, indicates a much more compartmentalised set of multiple
identities in which ethnicity is salient in relation to his family and neighbourhood
only. ‘Greekness’ is less significant as an organising feature of his daily life and thus
of his self-identity.

The term hybridity has been used to capture this sense of ethnic multiplicity as
evident in dual or multiple identities. Hyphenated identities also emphasise the
notion that identification is a provisional and fluid process. Second-generation immi-
grants with hybrid identities are viewed as being in a position of ‘in-betweenness’
(Bhabha 1990), an idea that highlights the problematic nature of boundaries.

ESSENTIALISM VERSUS CONSTRUCTIONISM. Discussions of ethnic identification
often distinguish between two approaches to ethnicity: essentialist and constructionist
(Hall 1992a, 1992b). An essentialist approach to ethnicity suggests that there is one
clear, authentic set of characteristics which members of an ethnic group share and
which do not alter across time. An essentialist perspective on ethnicity tends to reify
‘traditional’ notions of ethnicity, thereby rendering them as ‘fixed’ and ‘static’. In
contrast, a constructionist approach views ethnicity as a social process rather than a
fixed entity:

A constructionist approach assumes that ethnic and racial identities vary across space
and change across time ... It also assumes that ethnic groups are actively involved in
the construction and reconstruction of identities, negotiating boundaries, asserting
meanings, interpreting their own pasts, resisting the impositions of the present,
and claiming the future. Neither actions nor circumstances alone create groups ...
Identities are created, elaborated, and re-created in the interaction between the two.
(Cornell & Hartmann 1998: 101. Reprinted by permission of Pine Forge, Inc.)

It is important to note, however, that members of ethnic groups can (and do)
mobilise essentialist notions of ethnicity as a strategy for gaining power and access
to resources in contemporary society. Members of ethnic groups typically lay claim
to some true, ‘authentic’ ethnic identity based on some ‘essential’ or ‘natural’ quality
that has persisted across time (for example, see Julian 2004). It is through such

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @

SOCIAL NETWORKS OF STEPHEN (A) AND STAVROS (B) :
Legend F
0
O kin C
LC friends U
S
A associates
University friends S fl friends who are also
(some non-Greek) / A co-members of organisations

Intimate relationships are
closest to Stephen, intimacy
decreasing with distance from
the centre of the diagram.

Neighbours

Legend

O kin
© wife’s kin

x Work associates == Own kin
<I (non-Greek) 7 \ friends
ae L # ? Lee) A associates

Friends and
co-members of

O kin who are also
koumbaroi

friends who are also
koumbaroi

organisations

@ kin, friends,

lB associates who are
A also co-members
@ of organisations

—-—-—-— overseas ties

Intimate relationships
are closest to Stavros,
} ; intimacy decreasing
Neighbours Wife’s kin with distance from the
B centre of the network.

Note: ‘Koumbari’ refers to spiritual kinship; that is, where a special relationship is established with wedding sponsors
who subsequently baptise the children of the marriage (Bottomley 1979: 84).

Source: Bottomley, G. (1979) After the Odyssey: A Study of Greek Australians, Brisbane, University of Queensland Press, pp. 114-15.
Reproduced with permission.

Q: Examine the social bases of your own patterns of ethnic identification by preparing a ‘map’
of your social networks. In what ways does this social network shed light on the meaning
and salience of your ethnic identity/ies? Explore the changes that have taken place in your

social relationships and your ethnic identification throughout your life course.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO2 Identify the
factors influencing the
process of immigrant
settlement and the
biographies of the
Australian-born

essentialising processes that the boundaries between ‘us’ and ‘them’ can be treated
as ‘given’ rather than socially constructed.

The deployment of essentialist notions of ethnicity by individuals or ethnic groups for
instrumental and/or affective purposes has been termed ‘strategic essentialism’ (Spivak
1990; Gilroy 1987). In their analysis of Lebanese youth in Sydney, Noble, Poynting and
Tabar (1999) illustrate the deployment of ‘strategic essentialism’. Importantly, however,
they also identify the existence of a ‘strategic hybridity’. This refers to the ways in which
a hyphenated, or hybrid, identity (for example, Lebanese-Australian) enables individuals
to strategically mobilise two (or more) ethnic identities and a range of positions within
them (see also Poynting 2009).

@ ETHNICITY, MIGRATION AND SETTLEMENT

Factors affecting settlement patterns

In his analysis of ethnic groups, Max Weber identified two key processes that lead to
the formation of ethnic groups: colonisation and immigration. Here we will focus on
Australia’s postwar immigration program. (For a fuller exploration of the process of
colonisation, see Chapter 3.)

‘Ethnicity’ is a central concept in the analysis of immigrants and patterns of
settlement. Often it is assumed incorrectly that ethnicity determines specific pat-
terns of immigrant settlement. For example, in Australia it is often assumed that
Greek, Vietnamese and Lebanese immigrants will form ethnic communities,
maintain their language and marry within the ethnic group, while Dutch, German
and Scandinavian immigrants will assimilate, thereby ‘losing’ their language and
becoming indistinguishable from the Anglo-Australian majority. Ethnicity is
being used inappropriately here as an explanatory concept. If we examine settle-
ment patterns among Dutch, German and Scandinavian immigrants in Australia
we find variation. The settlement of Dutch immigrants, for example, demonstrates
two distinctive patterns: some Dutch immigrants have ‘assimilated’, while others
have established distinctive and highly visible ethnic communities (Julian 2001,
2006). Clearly, ethnicity per se (in this case ‘Dutchness’) cannot explain these
alternative patterns of settlement among Dutch immigrants. This is not to suggest
that ethnicity should be dismissed as a factor in determining immigrant settlement
outcomes. Rather, it indicates the need to be precise about what we mean by the
term ‘ethnicity’ so that we can identify how ethnicity is implicated in the phenom-
enon being investigated.

So, how does the process of immigrant settlement unfold? What are the factors
determining the patterns of settlement characteristic of different immigrant catego-
ries? For example, how do we explain the fact that some immigrants have established
visible ethnic communities whereas other immigrants have not? The answer lies in
examining the relationships between type of migration, social networks and social
organisations, opportunity structures, and identification processes.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @®

Type of migration

Type of migration is a key factor determining settlement patterns. The development of
an ethnic community is a group process: it requires the existence of a number of people
who share a ‘consciousness of kind’ and who interact with each other, thus mobilising
common cultural resources (for example, language or religion). Individualistic migra-
tion is not likely to lead to the formation of ethnic communities. Chain migration and
refugee movements are more likely to create the social conditions for ethnic commu-
nity formation in the receiving society. This is because on arrival in the receiving soci-
ety, social networks are likely to arise among those participating in these forms of
migration. It should be noted, however, that ethnic community formation may occur
after the initial stages of settlement. Members of ethnic minorities may establish social
support networks in the context of the exclusionary practices associated with racism
and discrimination.

Social networks and social organisations

The existence of social networks makes it more likely that ethnic social organisations
will be established. The main reason for this is that the existence of social networks
among members of an ethnic group provides a clientele for the establishment of for-
mal ethnic organisations such as churches, workplaces and shops (Breton 1964). If
these social networks are also spatially concentrated, then this contributes to the
development of a spatially concentrated ethnic community.

Ethnic communities vary in their level of social organisation. The concept of ‘insti-
tutional completeness’ (Breton 1964) is useful for describing variations in the degree
of organisational development in the ethnic community. ‘Institutional completeness’
refers to the extent to which an ethnic community contains representative types of
organisations, such that individuals may live out their lives within the boundaries of
that community. For example, an ethnic community with a high level of institutional
completeness is one that is likely to be highly visible due to the existence of ‘ethnic’
churches, shops and businesses, as well as ‘ethnic’ welfare organisations and services
such as lawyers, doctors and accountants. An ethnic community with a low level of
institutional completeness may have only one ‘ethnic’ organisation (for example, a
social club) and may largely comprise informal relationships among members of an
ethnic group. Thus, the extent of closure in the social relationships of ethnic group
members is associated with the degree of institutional completeness of the ethnic
community. Giorgas and Jones’ (2002) study of ethnic intermarriage among first-,
second- and later-generation Australians demonstrates this relationship between
organisational structure and social closure in the Australian context.

Not all immigrants are necessarily members of ethnic communities. An indivi-
dual’s level of involvement in, and membership of, an ethnic community can be
viewed on a continuum. At one end of the continuum there are individuals who
maintain no ethnic relationships and who, while being aware of their membership
of an ethnic group, attach little significance to this fact. At the other end of the

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO3 Summarise
significant trends in
Australian immigration
since World War Il

continuum there are individuals who live out their lives totally within the boundaries
of the ethnic community. For these individuals, ethnicity is likely to be a primary
aspect of self-identity: it may constitute a ‘master status’.

Whether or not an individual lives his or her life within the boundaries of an ethnic
community depends in large part on the size and structure of the ethnic community
itself. For example, if the ethnic group is small in number and has little in the way of
formal organisations, individuals of necessity will interact with people outside the ethnic
group. Alternatively, individual migrants may choose not to belong to a specific ethnic
community (for example, see Cohen 2004). Furthermore, following Breton (1964), it is
important to recognise that an individual’s interpersonal relations may develop within
a number of alternative communities (that is, the community of his or her own ethnicity
as well as other ethnic communities, including Anglo-Australian ones). Thus, individuals
can be simultaneously members of a number of ‘ethnic’ communities.

Opportunity structures

The structure of opportunities within the ethnic community and the receiving society
is an important determinant of the direction of settlement. This refers to opportuni-
ties in the labour market, education, religion, residence, sport and leisure, among
others. Importantly, barriers to opportunities in the structures of the receiving society
may be created and reinforced by racism and/or discrimination.

Identification processes

For immigrants, ethnic identities are grounded in patterns of interaction. Members
of institutionally complete ethnic communities are more likely to mobilise ethnicity
across a wide range of social contexts; thus, ethnic identity is likely to be highly salient
for them. Conversely, immigrants who do not belong to institutionally complete eth-
nic communities may find that the salience of ethnicity declines as a component of
self-identity along with length of residence. Alternatively, as we discussed earlier, the
meaning of ethnic identity for the individual may change over time such that it is
renegotiated as a form of symbolic ethnicity. However, in Australia the majority of
immigrants are simultaneously located in the ethnic community and the institutional
structures of the receiving society. The salience of ethnicity for them will reflect, in
part, their differential social locations. The notion of hyphenated identities as dis-
cussed earlier reflects the multiplicity of these social locations and the fact that alter-
native ethnic identities are mobilised situationally, while the concepts of hybridity,
super-diversity (Vertovec 2007) and language nesting (Ndhlovu 2013) move further
towards the notion of simultaneous sites of ethnic identification.

lM TRENDS IN AUSTRALIAN IMMIGRATION

One of the first pieces of legislation enacted after Federation was the Immigration
Restriction Act 1901. This Act formed the legislative basis of what came to be known
as the White Australia policy. It was enforced in part by a dictation test that required

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @®

intending immigrants to write out 50 words in a European language. While this lan-
guage was usually English, other languages were sometimes required, as it was gener-
ally agreed by those who framed the legislation that it would be used solely to exclude
non-white immigrants (Tate 2009: 104). It was thus a policy based on race, not
nationality.

Australia’s post-World War II immigration program began in 1945 under the immigration
direction of Arthur Calwell, Australia’s first Immigration Minister. Its rationale was_™ vot tana
twofold: to populate the country as a defence strategy and to recruit unskilled labour
for industrialisation projects. Source countries reflected an ethnic preference hierar-
chy that was consistent with the White Australia policy. The most preferred immi-
grants were those from Britain and Northern Europe, followed by those from
Southern Europe; non-Europeans were excluded until the 1970s. Australia’s postwar
immigration program was thus marked by ‘waves’ of immigrants from different
source countries (and these accord with global migration patterns—see Chapter 13).

If we examine Australia’s postwar immigration program, we can identify six
significant trends. First, the proportion of the population born overseas has been
steadily increasing. Almost 28 per cent of the Australian population is overseas-born
(ABS 2013a), compared with 10 per cent in 1947 and 20 per cent in 1971 (Castles
et al. 1998: 19). According to the United Nations, Australia has the eleventh largest
stock of overseas-born persons (2006, cited in Hugo 2006: 108). In the past 15 years,
the number of China-born residents has tripled and the number of India-born resi-
dents has increased fourfold (DIAC 2013a: 2). Furthermore, in 2011, one-fifth
(20 per cent) of the Australian population had at least one overseas-born parent (ABS
2013b; Castles et al. 2013: 115). There are also relatively high levels of intermarriage
between migrants and the Australia-born (Carrington et al. 2007; Heard et al. 2009).
Research has shown that the extent of intermarriage increases across generations, so
that the second generation are more likely to intermarry than the first generation
(Giorgas & Jones 2002: 62). Nearly three-quarters of the second generation marry
outside their ethnic group (Price 1994), and ‘the proportion of cultural groups with
mixed ancestry increases with continuing migration and longer residence’ (Castles et
al. 1998: 37). At the same time, however, out-marriage is decreasing among some
culturally distinctive groups as the size and institutional completeness of the ethnic
community grows and thus opportunity for in-marriage increases (1998: 37).
Residential concentration also increases the likelihood of in-marriage (Giorgas &
Jones 2002: 49).

Second, while the overseas-born proportion of the Australian population has been
steadily increasing since 1947, it should be noted that the 1947 figure represents the
lowest level in Australian history. In 1891, 32 per cent of the population was overseas-
born. In 1901 the proportion born overseas was 23 per cent, indicating a level at
Federation just below the current level (see Figure 5.1).

Third, since the White Australia policy was abandoned in 1973, source countries
have become more diverse. In the early postwar years, the majority of Australia’s
immigrants came from Europe, with nearly half from the British Isles. However, by

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 100 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

eet) 3 S885) Australia’s population born overseas

%
7 30

25
+ 20
15
- 10
—5

i T T T T T 1
1893 1913 1933 1953 1973 1993 2013

(a) Census years only until 1981. Post 1981 based on estimated population at 30 June.
(b) Estimates for 1992-2006 have been recast and estimates from June quarter 2012 onwards are preliminary.

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2013a) Migration, Australia, 2011-12 and 2012-13, Cat. No. 3412.0, <http://
www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/3412.0Chapter1 201 1-12%20and%202012-13>, accessed 23 January 2014.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

the 1990s, 30-40 per cent of immigrants came from countries in Asia (Jupp 2002).
These changes are reflected in the regional origins of Australia’s settler intake (see
Table 5.2). Between 1996 and 2005, persons born in Sub-Saharan Africa recorded
the largest growth of all major regions, with the largest average increase recorded
among persons born in Sudan (28 per cent per year) (ABS 2005: 6). Despite these
changes, however, it is important to recognise that the ‘ethnic origins’ of the
Australian population remain predominantly European. In 2013 the largest cate-
gory of overseas-born residents was those born in the United Kingdom (5.3 per
cent), followed by those born in New Zealand (2.6 per cent of the total population)
(ABS 2013a). Table 5.2 shows the regions of birth of the Australian population
with the largest proportion of the overseas-born being from North-West Europe
(7.2 per cent).

Regions of birth, proportion of Australia’s population—selected years at 30 June

1999 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009')

% % % % % % %

Australia 76.9 76.2 75.8 75.4 74.9 74.2 73.5
Oceania and Antarctica (excl. Aust.) 24 pe 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.9 3.0
North-West Europe 72 74 73 he ns 13 ved
Southern and Eastern Europe 4.6 43 4.2 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.8
North Africa and the Middle East 12 13 14 14 14 15 15
South-East Asia 2.8 3.0 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 34
North-East Asia 1.6 2.0 2.) 23 24 2.6 2.8
Southern and Central Asia 0.9 13 14 18 1.8 2.1 23
Americas 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 ir. 1.1 1.1
Sub-Saharan Africa 0.7 1.0 1.0 Mtl 1.1 1.2 13
(a) Estimates for 2008/09 are preliminary.

TABLE 5.2 Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009) Migration, Australia, Cat. No. 3412.0, Canberra, AGPS, p. 46.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @®

Fourth, while early postwar migrants were predominantly unskilled, there has
been an increased emphasis on skilled and business migration since the late 1980s
(Collins 1996: 84; DIMA 2006; DIAC 2010b; DIAC 2013b: 28). A ‘global quest for
talent’ has emerged as an integral component of globalisation so that a number
of countries are now competing for the most innovative and skilled workers
(Hugo 2006: 118). Australia has responded with ‘a massive change in the selection
of immigrants wishing to come to Australia with a much greater focus on skill
than ever before’ (Hugo 2006: 119). This is clearly evident in Figure 5.2. The Skill
Stream has grown in size every year since 1997/98, apart from a decrease of
6 per cent in 2009/10 in response to the global financial crisis. In 2011/12, the Skill
Stream delivered 125 755 places, the Family Stream 58 604 places, Special Eligibility
639 places (DIAC 2013b: 24) and the Humanitarian Stream 13 759 places (DIAC
2013b: 74).

Fifth, one of the most significant changes in Australian immigration since the
postwar era has been the increase in temporary migration in the past decade

Fricure 5.2) Migration program outcomes by stream, Australia, 1989/90 to 2010/11

140 000
i Family
Skill
120000- | ™ Special eligibility
( Humanitarian
100 000 4
80 000+
60 000 4
40 000 4
20 000 4
e EN ot > Lx ko Lo
ESEESEEESLE
PPP

Sources: Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (DIMA) (2006), cited in G. Hugo (2006) ‘Globalization and
Changes in Australian International Migration’, Journal of Population Research, 23(2), pp. 107-34 at 119; Department of
Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) (2013b) Australia’s Migration Trends 2011-2012, <http://www.immi.gov.au/media/
publications/statistics/immigration-update/australian-migration-trends-2011-12.pdf>, accessed 14 January 2014.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

(Hugo 2006: 110). Hugo explains the changes in international migration that have
contributed to this:

The link between globalization and increased temporary migration is a close one. The
internationalization of labour markets, the development of multinational companies
which transfer their workforce between nations, the cheapening of international travel,
and the information and communication technology revolution allowing migrants
to maintain close and regular contact with their homeland, have all facilitated the
development of temporary migration. (2006: 110)

Three of the most significant components of this trend are ‘the massive increase in
international migration of students’ (Hugo 2006: 111), the uptake of the new
Temporary Business (Long Stay) visas (known as subclass 457) and the growth in
Working Holiday Makers (DIAC 2010a: 57-8) (see Figures 5.3 and 5.4). The growth
in temporary resident and visitor visas has continued since 2009. In 2010/11, a total
of over 4.1 million visas were granted. This increased by 2.6 per cent in 2011/12 with
over 4.2 million visas granted (DIAC 2013b: 44-5). Student visa grants peaked in
2008/09 after 11 consecutive years of growth. They declined in 2009/10 and 2010/11
but showed a 1.0 per cent increase in 2011/12 (see Figure 5.4).

Sixth, emigration from Australia has been on the increase in recent years; in 2008/09,
Australia reached its highest level yet (DIAC 2010a: 7). A key feature of this trend is the
increasing proportion of Australian-born (rather than overseas-born) citizens leaving the
country. As Hugo (2006: 120) notes, “each year since 1998-99 a new record number of
Australian-born emigrants left the nation’, with many of these being the young and well-
educated (DIAC 2010a: 7-8). This too is part of the ‘new world immigration situation of

et) 5 )85)) Temporary visas granted in recent years

300
lf Business long-stay (subclass 457)
[1 Working holiday‘)
250 4
my BH Student
i=}
i=}
So
so 200-
2
(=
g
D
® 150-
o
ol
>
S)
© 700 >
°
Qa
[Ss
2
50 =
0
2002/03 2004/05 2006/07 2008/09 2010/11 2011/12

(a) These working holiday visas are the initial and subsequent visas granted onshore and offshore.

Source: Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) (2013b) Australia’s Migration Trends 2011-2012, <http://www.
immi.gov.au/media/publications/statistics/immigration-update/australian-migration-trends-2011-12.pdf>, accessed 14
January 2014. © Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? t 106 )

ety 3 5) student visas granted, 1993/94 to 2011/12

350

300 +

250 +

200 4
1504
100 -

‘antl

50

& © ® © % ©
oF of cs ee ay ee Sc sf Os oe oe
PPP FPP SP FP FGF oF of

Student visas granted (’000s) B

nN
EF Sg PaPgS hw

S S
SES SS S

Source: Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) (2013b) Australia’s Migration Trends 2011-2012, p. 54, <http://www.
immi.gov.au/media/publications/statistics/immigration-update/australian-migration-trends-2011-12.pdf>, last accessed
14 January 2014. © Commonwealth of Australia. Reproduced under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Australia BY licence.

the twenty-first century’ (Hugo 2006: 128) with its increasing pattern of circularity in
population movement between countries, prompted in part by the internationalisation of
business activity and the globalisation of labour markets (Hugo 2006: 120).

Mi SETTLEMENT POLICY: FROM ASSIMILATION TO
MULTICULTURALISM

Settlement policies have moved from assimilation to multiculturalism. This change
has occurred in large part as a consequence of the actions and resistances of Australia’s
postwar immigrants, rather than because of any benevolent attitudes on the part of
those in the dominant group (Hinz 2010). Multiculturalism as a policy has also
undergone a number of transformations since its inception in the 1970s. (For a fuller
discussion of changes in Australian settlement policy, see Jamrozik et al. 1995; Castles
1992; Jupp 1998; Borowski 2000; Jayasuriya 2008; Tate 2009; Colic-Peisker 2011;
Moran 2011; Mann 2012; Castles et al. 2013.)

In 1977 the Australian Ethnic Affairs Council (AEAC) adopted a formal statement
against assimilation. It advocated a multicultural society based on the diversity of ethnic
groups and cultural identities; it also stressed the importance of equal opportunity in the
labour market, and equal access to services and resources (AEAC 1977). The implemen-
tation of these policies has led to debates that focus on the tensions between cultural and
structural pluralism. Cultural pluralism—supporting the right to maintain and express
one’s cultural identity—has been central to the formation and maintenance of multicul-
tural policies and philosophy in Australia. However, structural pluralism has been viewed
with concern. In general, those on the right of politics have supported structural assimila-
tion. According to left-wing critiques of multicultural policy, however, multiculturalism

LO4 Discuss the shift
in Australian settlement
policy from assimilation
to multiculturalism

assimilation

The process whereby
Indigenous people and
immigrants relinquish their
culture and become
indistinguishable from the
Anglo-Australian dominant
group. It also refers to
Australian government policy
from the 1950s through to the
early 1970s.

multiculturalism
Sociologically, this refers to a
process of interaction between
different cultures. In Australian
policy terms, it refers to the
expectation that all members of
society have the right to equal
access to services, regardless of
ethnic background.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

has emphasised cultural pluralism at the expense of structural issues relating to equality
of opportunity. (For a more detailed discussion of the relationship between cultural and
structural pluralism, see Jayasuriya 1989, 2008; Castles et al. 1992.)

Since it was first introduced into Australian settlement policy, the meaning of
‘multiculturalism’ has changed. The initial model of ‘culturalist multiculturalism’ was
characterised by ‘an equality of respect, the need for mutual understanding and an
acceptance or endorsement of cultural differences’ (Jayasuriya 2008). In this model of
cultural pluralism, no single culture was viewed as ‘superior’ to the others; rather, a range
of different cultures, customs and values were accorded equal status within the Australian
way of life. However, during the Howard era (1996-2007), following heightened con-
cerns over ‘the possibility of social conflict, fragmentation and disharmony’ (Jayasuriya
2008), a backlash against this conventional model occurred. During his period as prime
minister, John Howard articulated a particular concept of the Australian nation in which
an Anglo-Saxon Australian ‘lifestyle’ was identified as a ‘core’ culture and, as such, was
given a privileged and dominant status (Tate 2009: 110, 113). It has been argued that

... by the time he [Howard] contested the 2007 federal election, Australia had moved
away from a multicultural model of nation and returned to a more ‘constitutive’
model, premised on an ideal of assimilation which was dominant during Australia’s
pre-multicultural history. (Tate 2009: 97)

This shift away from support for ‘multiculturalism’ towards a greater focus on an
Australian core culture is evident in a number of changes that occurred during this
time (Mann 2012; Castles et al. 2013). These include the increased emphasis in public
discourse on a ‘distinctive Australian character’ (leading to claims of behaviours that
were considered to be ‘unAustralian’); Howard’s announcement in 2006 that ‘the
Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs would be renamed the
Department of Immigration and Citizenship, dropping the reference to “multicultur-
alism” altogether’ (Tate 2009: 112); the introduction of the Citizenship Test in 2007
which demands that new citizens identify with a singular “Australian way of life’ (Tate
2009); and the requirement introduced in 2007 that all people applying for visas into
Australia (with a few exceptions such as visitors and New Zealand citizens) must sign
an Australian Values Statement. In 2011, and against this trend, the Gillard Labor
government reaffirmed its commitment to multiculturalism with the launch of a new
multicultural policy The People of Australia (DIAC 2011b).

It is clear that support for multicultural policy is subject to change over time, and
the strengths and weaknesses of multiculturalism are an ongoing source of debate
among various social commentators, including sociologists with differing theoretical
orientations and political persuasions (Hodge & O’Carroll 2006: 11-20). Most would
agree, however, that policy outcomes vary on the basis of such factors as social class,
gender, age, length of residence, immigrant status and ethnicity/race. The following
section identifies some of the key issues relating to the variety of immigrants who
have entered Australia since World War II.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? t 106 )

EVERYDAY MULTICULTURALISM
In recent years, a number of sociologists have stressed the importance of distinguishing between
multiculturalism as policy and multiculturalism as lived experience (Hage 1998; Ang et al. 2002;
Hodge & O’Carroll 2006; Wise & Velayutham 2009; Phillips 2010; Carruthers 2011). Multicultural
policy ‘is about managing differences and similarities alike, in ways that may be positive or negative

in different circumstances, according to different perspectives’ (Hodge & O’Carroll 2006: 2).

ncnon = =

Everyday multiculturalism, on the other hand, refers to:

The diversity that exists in real, lived environments, not simply in abstract multicultural policy,

and consequently implies layers of ethnically different individuals inhabiting suburbs and urban
environments, corporeally interacting with one another as neighbours, shoppers, workers; rubbing
up against one another in a myriad of quotidian situations. (Wise, cited in Bloch & Dreher 2009: 195)

This is the realm that Hage (1998) terms the ‘multicultural real’, Hodge and O’Carroll
(2006) call ‘multiculture’ and Ang et al. (2002) refer to as ‘cultural diversity’. The emphasis
here is on the lived experience of cultural diversity—that is, on the attitudes and behaviours
of the increasing number of Australians who find themselves living with cultural diversity.
Both Hodge and O’Carroll (2006) and Ang et al. (2002) stress that this lived experience is
much more positive than media reports would have us believe and that ‘most Australians
live hybrid lives involving influences from many cultures’ (Ang et al. 2002: 4). Importantly,
however, recent studies (for example, Bloch & Dreher 2009; Wise 2009) have also shown the
coexistence of ‘everyday multiculturalism’ (or relatively unproblematic daily cultural mixing)

and ‘everyday racism’. That is:

The formation of attitudes and understandings that are so embedded in the everyday life of a
racialised culture, in this case Australian culture, that the members of that culture, those that,
loosely, we might call Australians, don’t even recognise themselves as making decisions based in
a racialised history. (Stratton, cited in Bloch & Dreher 2009: 196)

In her analysis of beach culture in the Sydney suburb of Cronulla prior to the violent
confrontation between Australians of Anglo-Celtic and Arab backgrounds in December 2005
that came to be known as the ‘Cronulla riots’, Wise (2009) offers a nuanced account of this
daily cultural mixing and the ways in which perceived threats from the ‘other’ are contextually
and spatially determined (Bloch & Dreher 2009: 196). She shows how the very different ways
in which Anglo-Australians (‘Shire types’) and Lebanese-Australians (‘Lebs’) used the beach,
as well as the vast differences in their embodied presence on the beach, contributed to the
tensions that led ultimately to the Cronulla riots. A sense of her argument can be gained from

the following extracts:

Summer at Cronulla has a relaxed feel. Tanned bodies spread out along the beach as if in mass
meditation. The voices and movements of others on the beach seem absorbed by the sand and
wind and surf such that one can feel almost alone despite being amidst hundreds of others.
Anglo boys cluster in small groups, sometimes mixed with girls. The surfer boys are easy to pick
out ... Surfer boys personify the idealised Anglo body. With a few exceptions ... these bodies are
typically affectively contained. There are few expressive gestures and their speech is clipped,
using as few words as possible. Yep. Righto. Mate. Interactions with other bodies are similarly
circumscribed by codes of masculinity. ‘Chilled out’ is how they might be described by some;
‘cold and unresponsive’ by others ... Male ‘Leb’ bodies, on the other hand, are stereotypically

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

expressive bodies; their bodies move outward, connect with others, and demonstrate
emotions in obvious ways. Boisterous, rowdy and aggressive is how they are sometimes
described. (Wise 2009: 128-9)

Building on this description, Wise shows how soccer games on the beach, usually involving
groups of young men of Middle Eastern background, created tensions because they were

experienced negatively by Anglo beach users:

The soccer is typically casual, involving groups of young men of Middle Eastern

background ... playing in the vicinity of the flag area either on the shoreline or on the dry
sand. The games are usually good natured, if boisterous. The tension points occur when the
beach is crowded and balls go astray; bouncing into other users, or when players get
overexcited in chasing a ball through the crowd, kicking sand along the way. This behaviour
is read as ‘uncivil’ by Anglo beach users ... Anglo experiences of ‘Leb’ difference on the beach
range from ‘feeling uncomfortable’ to intense irritation ... (Wise 2009: 130-1)

With respect to the Cronulla riots, Wise notes that:

Soccer on the beach at Cronulla came up in news reports about the ‘causes’ of tension and it
emerged in interviews conducted by community and youth workers, in reports to council
and discussions with council life guards. Indeed it started the initial altercation between the
off-duty lifesavers and the ‘Leb boys’ prior to the riot ... (Wise 2009: 130)

Similar tensions are reported in Bloch and Dreher’s (2009) study of the use of public parks
in Southern Sydney. Both studies offer important insights on the theme of ‘place-sharing’ in
multicultural Australia and highlight the importance of examining the complex relationships

between place and identity. As others have noted:

It isa mistake ... to view the Cronulla riots as a clash between the core culture and the
cultures on the margins. Such a conceptualisation perpetuates the idea that ‘ethnic minorities
are still guests in our midst’ (Burchell 2006). Rather, the riots need to be seen as ‘local
communities in conflict over shared public space where ethnicity is the fuel for the conflict
rather than its all-purpose explanation’. (Burchell 2006, cited in Johanson & Glow 2007)

What is important about these studies of ‘everyday multiculturalism’ is the taken-for-
grantedness of ethnic and cultural diversity as an inherent part of the Australian way of life
as alived reality. They explore how difference is negotiated on a daily basis among ordinary
Australians of diverse backgrounds. The framework adopted in these studies is inclusive
rather than one that perpetuates the division between ‘us’ (Anglo-Australians) and ‘them’
(multicultural ‘ethnics’).

Q: Is it important to distinguish between multiculturalism as policy and ‘everyday

multiculturalism’? Justify your answer with examples from your own lived experience.

LOS Analyse the impact of | IMMIGRANTS IN AUSTRALIA

class, gender, age and entry
status on immigrants’

experiencesin Austraia ~SOCal class: Immigrants and the labour market

The history of Australia’s postwar immigration program has been a history of labour
migration. One of the key aspects of immigrant settlement is thus participation in the
labour market. There are two alternative theoretical perspectives that inform the

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @®

analysis of immigrants and the labour market: human capital theory and labour seg-
mentation theory.

According to human capital theory, any differences between immigrants and
non-immigrants are a consequence of different amounts of human capital (for
example, educational levels, marketable skills) and therefore ‘reflect differences in
the average productive capabilities of the two groups’ (Wooden et al. 1994: 220).
Researchers such as Evans and Kelley (1991), for example, argue that over time mar-
ket forces will override any differences in pay differentials; thus, discrimination
cannot persist. Using the human capital theory approach, a number of studies based
on the ‘Longitudinal Survey of Immigrants to Australia’ conclude that the recent
highly skilled and qualified migrants entering Australia are ‘achieving increasingly
positive outcomes in the Australian labour market’ (Ho & Alcorso 2004: 238). Ho
and Alcorso (2004: 238), in a critique of this view, argue that this kind of contem-
porary research ‘underscores governmental discourses on migration policy’, which
typically present a ‘success story’ narrative (for example, see Cobb-Clark 2000;
Richardson et al. 2001, 2002).

In contrast, labour segmentation theory emphasises the role of ethnicity in creating
a fragmentation of the working class (de Lepervanche 1975; Collins 1978; Ho &
Alcorso 2004). In applying this theory to Australia, Collins (1984, 1991, 1996) has
argued that the recruitment of predominantly unskilled labour throughout the first
three decades of the postwar immigration program, together with the effects of
racism (both as ideology and as exclusionary practices), have had important
consequences for the structure of the Australian labour market. He argues that the
Australian labour market is segmented along two key axes: country of birth and gen-
der. This has produced four distinct segments in the Australian labour market,
excluding Aboriginal workers, whose relationship to the Australian labour market is
unique (Collins 1991: 80).

While this broad pattern has persisted, it is important to recognise that the seg-
mentation of the labour market is not static (Collins 1996: 83). Recent changes to
Australia’s immigration program, as well as the processes of economic restructuring,
have had an impact on patterns of labour market segmentation (see Colic-Peisker &
Tilbury 2006). In the past two decades there has been a shift in the immigrant intake,
away from a predominance of unskilled workers towards more highly skilled and
qualified professionals, technicians and managers (Colic-Peisker 2011). Many of
these are migrants from non-English-speaking countries, especially from the Asian
region (Collins 1996: 84; Jupp 1998: 120, 2002; ABS 2013a). In recent years, then,
many immigrants from Asian countries have moved into primary-sector jobs. This
has led to a bimodal distribution throughout the labour market, with immigrant men
from Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Korea, Malaysia, China and Thailand increasingly
represented in professional and managerial positions, while Indo-Chinese men and
women are concentrated in low-skilled jobs in the declining manufacturing industry
(Collins 1996: 84). Furthermore, research (Ho & Alcorso 2004; Colic-Peisker 2010)
shows that skilled migrants do not necessarily fare as well as the government ‘success

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

story discourse suggests. Ho and Alcorso’s analysis of the Longitudinal Survey of
Immigrants to Australia (LSIA) shows ‘a clear portrait of downward social mobility’
when pre- and post-migration experiences in the labour market are compared. They
found that ‘after arrival, migrants were less able to secure jobs in which they fre-
quently used their qualifications’ (2004: 243; see also Colic-Peisker 2010). Ho and
Alcorso conclude that country of birth and gender affect labour market outcomes in
Australia, which ‘reflect processes of segmentation in specific Australian labour mar-
kets’ (2004: 253). Similarly, Colic-Peisker’s research supports the argument that an
‘accent ceiling’ exists in the primary sector ‘that works against professionals who are
highly fluent in English’ (2002: 162). In sum, these studies provide a more complex
picture of the labour market outcomes of skilled migrants than that offered by human
capital theorists and the Australian government.

Ethnic minority youth

Second-generation immigrants demonstrate a number of key social concerns sur-
rounding ethnicity in Australian society. These include identity transformation
Julian 1998, 2004, 2004/05; Baldassar 1999; Babacan 2005; Tsolidas 2005; Ali & Sonn
2010); cultural transmission (Baldassar & Skrbis 1998); the relationship between eth-
nicity, class, gender, race and sexuality (Woelz-Stirling et al. 2001; Zevallos 2003; Tan
2006); intergenerational mobility (Vasta 1995: 55; Khoo et al. 2002); and the relation-
ship between youth, ethnicity and crime (White 2009; Collins et al. 2000; White et al.
1999; Pe-Pua 1996). In the following we examine some of these concerns through a
discussion of cultural identity and social mobility.

Cultural identity

In reviewing representations of second-generation immigrants in Australia over the
past five decades, it is apparent that there has been a shift from a relatively pessimistic
to a more optimistic view of their social situation and their cultural identities. During
the assimilationist era, the second generation were described as being ‘caught between
two cultures’. The intergenerational conflicts experienced by adolescents were
explained in terms of the ‘culture conflict’ or ‘culture clash’ model (Vasta 1995: 61).
Schoolchildren of non-English-speaking background were expected to assimilate,
and the expression of their language and traditions was either ignored or actively
discouraged. This provided a context in which the ‘straight-line theory’ (Baldassar &
Skrbis 1998: 454) of identity construction was supported. This theory saw culture loss
and the weakening of ethnic identity occurring over generations as part and parcel of
the inevitability of assimilation. This establishes a discursive framework in which the
second generation experience their situation as one of conflict between two cultures.
The resolution of this conflict is presented as a matter of individuals ‘choosing’ one
of two alternative identities: an ‘ethnic’ identity or an Australian identity. In an
assimilationist era, the latter choice was structurally supported, encouraged via insti-
tutions such as the school, and rewarded both formally and informally.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @®

However, despite the expectations of the dominant group that immigrants (and
especially the second generation) would assimilate, many resisted the pressure
towards Anglo-conformity. Furthermore, by the time the early postwar youth of non-
English-speaking background had reached adulthood, multiculturalism was becom-
ing established (Vasta 1995: 62). The increased acceptance of cultural diversity
associated with multiculturalism allowed identities to be constructed with far more
agency on the part of the second generation (Vasta 1995: 63). Rather than being
‘caught between two cultures’, the second generation came to be seen as having
‘double cultural competences’ (Vasta 1993: 220). Studies have shown that second-
generation men and women are now far more comfortable with bicultural identities
(Tsolidas 1986, cited in Vasta 1995: 64), blended identities (Poynting 2009) and mul-
tiple identities (Ali & Sonn 2010; Ndhlovu 2013).

As noted earlier, cultural heterogeneity in Australian society has continued to
increase considerably since the early postwar years. This is a context in which not
only biculturalism becomes recognised as potentially valuable, but multiple sub-
jectivities, or hybridity, come to the fore as a positive resource. Hybridity among
first- and second-generation immigrants is thus recognised by some (for exam-
ple, Ang 2000; Lo 2000) as a creative force in the ongoing construction of
Australian society.

Nevertheless, recent research has highlighted some of the limits to the construction
of hybrid identities among second- and third-generation Australians. Racial appear-
ance has been identified as a particularly significant barrier (Zevallos 2003; Julian
2004; Matereke 2009). For example, Tan’s study of second-, third- and fourth-gener-
ation Chinese- Australians clearly shows ‘the significant role of racial appearance and
“looks” in demarcating the boundaries between those who are unconditionally
accepted as “real” Australians, and those who are constituted as “foreign” and forever
cast beyond the pale of the Australian nation’ (Tan 2006: 66-7). Her research high-
lights the way in which the ubiquitous question “Where are you from?’ represents an
‘assumption of foreignness’ by the inquirer that can destabilise the individual’s sense
of Australianness. As Tan concludes:

This tyrannizing power stems from the conflation of ‘race, face and nation’ within
Australian discourse in which ‘whiteness’ and ‘Australianness’ are seen as synonymous
and ‘Asian looks’ become invested with notions of ‘foreignness’ and ‘un-Australianness’.
As a result, regardless of rights of birth and citizenship, generational longevity and
strong national and cultural identities grounded in Australia, and regardless of whether
they willingly choose to identify as Chinese (or Asian) or not, multi-generational
Chinese Australians find their identities are permanently incarcerated in China (and
Asia) while their claims to Australianness are constantly challenged and invalidated.
(2006: 77-8)

This may be a relevant factor in explaining the results of a question asking
people to describe their cultural identity that was put to a diverse sample of

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Australians (Ang et al. 2002). While the majority of Australia’s Anglo population
identified as Australian, ‘only 10% of Filipinos, 14% of Greek, 14% of Lebanese
and a miniscule [sic] 3% of Vietnamese described themselves as “Australians”
(Ang et al. 2002: 40).

Data from interviews with the second generation reveal some of the thinking
that may lie behind the survey data. An interviewee in Zevallos’ study made the
following statement:

It’s hard in Australia, because I’m not seen as Australian. I’m not. Even though I have
no accent, I was born here, but because my parents aren’t Australian. And I’m not
your typical blond-haired, blue-eyed Skippy. I’ve got the dark features. I mean, I look
different to them. Plus my background is different to them. (2003: 89)

Social mobility

Australian multiculturalism has been criticised for its concentration on issues relating
to culture, rendering issues of structural inequality as marginal (for example, Castles
et al. 1992; Jayasuriya 1989). There has been much debate over the degree to which
the children of immigrants have been upwardly mobile. Problems of educational
access and participation among immigrant children, particularly those from non-
English-speaking backgrounds, were first raised in the 1970s after three decades of
assimilationist policy. More recently, however, a number of significant research stud-
ies have indicated no general disadvantage for non-English-speaking background
(NESB) immigrants in education (Holton 1994: 169; Khoo et al. 2002). One of the
problems with this more optimistic view is the danger of overgeneralising. Windle
(2004) notes that recent research stressing the educational successes of immigrant
children has contributed to a widely held belief that there is no longer a problem of
migrant disadvantage. His research demonstrates that such conclusions result from
the analysis of aggregate data that, when examined in more detail, show significant
variation between groups differing in class and ethnicity (see Khoo 2002; Colic-
Peisker 2011).

How has this variation been explained? Cultural explanations have been presented
following a ‘cultural deficit’? model, in which differential academic outcomes are
explained in terms of cultural values (for example, education as valued or not valued;
the ‘ethnic success ethic’) and linguistic factors (for example, the disjuncture between
mother-tongue language use in the home and the need to use English at school)
(Holton 1994: 169). More recently, researchers have concluded that social class
(either in the country of origin before arrival in Australia, or in the Australian con-
text) is far more significant as a determinant of educational success (and thus rates of
social mobility) than are cultural and linguistic factors (Windle 2004). This would
also account for the variation that has been found within ethnic categories. Clearly, a
comprehensive explanation of variation in educational outcomes has not been devel-
oped. In his study of the educational experiences of students of Turkish background

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @®

in Australia, Windle stresses the need for research that takes account of the complex-
ity involved in educational outcomes:

The vastly differing school experiences of Australia’s current heterogenous mix of
labour migrants, refugees, fee-paying overseas students, skilled professionals and
business migrants, demand of future research attention to specific conditions of arrival
and differential demands made by educational systems.... Ultimately, this must be
based upon a sociologically sound understanding of why and how mapping patterns
in participation through categories such as gender, class and ethnicity can contribute
to the improvement of education for all. (2004: 283)

Immigrant status: ‘Voluntary’ migrants, refugees, ‘transients’
and ‘undocumented’ migrants

The entry status of immigrants is a key factor in settlement experiences and out-
comes. With the increase in refugees from Indo-Chinese countries entering Australia
from the mid-1970s, a distinction was made between economically motivated (‘vol-
untary’) migrants and politically motivated (refugee, or ‘forced’) migrants. While this
analytical distinction has been seen as crucial to understanding settlement experi-
ences (see Feller 2005), it is equally important to recognise that it is an artificial dis-
tinction. In practice, research has shown that there is a complex interplay of political
and economic motivations among contemporary migrants (Papastergiardis 2000;
Jacobs 2011). More recently, two other types of immigrant have been the subject of
public and academic interest: ‘undocumented’ (‘illegal’) migrants and ‘transients’
(temporary residents).

These distinctions are reflected in the eligibility categories in immigration policy.
Australian immigration policy has two programs: the migration program (for ‘volun-
tary’ migrants, understood as “economically motivated’) and the humanitarian pro-
gram (for ‘forced’ migrants, understood as ‘politically motivated’). The migration
program has two main components: family and skill. The humanitarian program also
has two main components: refugees and special humanitarian (DIAC 2013b: 72-3).
Thus, refugees constitute a specific component of Australia’s humanitarian program.
Article IA of the Refugees Convention (United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, UNHCR 1951) defines a refugee as a person who has a

... well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular group or political opinion, is outside the country of his
[sic] nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of
the protection of that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the
country of his former habitual residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing

to such fear, is unwilling to return to it.

The special humanitarian program assists those fleeing ‘substantial discrimination
amounting to a gross violation of human rights’ (Williams & McKenzie 1996: 15).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

They ‘must be proposed for resettlement by an Australian citizen, permanent resi-
dent or organisation that can support them through the settlement process’ (DIAC
2013b: 73).

It is important to recognise that these distinctions relate to visa categories; as such,
they do not necessarily correspond with social formations in the receiving society.
Nevertheless, significant differences have been identified in the settlement experi-
ences of humanitarian entrants (often loosely described as ‘refugees’), compared with
economic or ‘voluntary’ migrants. For example, research has shown that recently
arrived refugees take a long time to establish themselves in local labour markets (Gal
Atem 2010; Colic-Peisker & Tilbury 2006, 2007; Iredale & D’Arcy 1992) and that
housing problems figure prominently in the early stages of resettlement. Refugee
status is also associated with a high level of welfare dependency, especially among
recent arrivals (Khoo 1994; Murphy & Williams 1996). Importantly, however, a
recent study by Graeme Hugo (2011) found that ‘as time passes the workforce par-
ticipation level of humanitarian entrants converges towards the Australian average,
and in the second generation there is an increase in the labour force participation rate
and a decrease in the unemployment rate’ (DIAC 201 1a: 25). Thus, it is entry status
(refugee or immigrant) rather than ethnicity per se that explains the settlement expe-
riences of, for example, Vietnamese-Australians. We should note here that studies
based on visa categories provide an important counter to ‘ethnicist’ accounts that
simplistically focus on the ascribed cultural traits of supposedly homogeneous
migrant groups. However, it is important to note that studies that focus only on visa
category can also lead to overly simplistic conclusions, as they avoid examining the
complex interplay of visa category with ethnicity, class and gender (Ho & Alcorso
2004; Fincher 1997; Martin 1984).

It can be argued that recent concern over ‘illegal’ immigrants arriving in
Australia by boat has been fuelled by the media. The situation with respect to ‘ille-
gal’ immigrants and ‘boat people’ can be analysed as a case of ‘moral panic’. Most
of Australia’s ‘undocumented’ or ‘illegal’ immigrants arrive by air and overstay
their visas. However, these cases are not publicised. As a consequence, the public
has developed a view of ‘undocumented’ immigrants as being predominantly from
the Middle East and arriving by boat, often assisted by criminal organisations
involved in people smuggling. The moral panic that arises serves to reinforce the
Otherness of ‘third-world looking immigrants’ (Hage 1998) and to associate such
Otherness with criminal activity. Speaking on behalf of the UNHCR, Erika Feller,
the director of the Department of International Protection, comments on this
phenomenon as follows:

The tendency in some countries towards criminalization of asylum-seekers and
refugees is very worrying. It is inflamed by irresponsible politicians who play politics
with human misery. While there may be asylum seekers and refugees associated with
serious crime, this is no justification for the majority being damned by association
with the few. Equating asylum seekers with a safe haven for terrorists is unsupported

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @®

by the facts, and only serves to vilify refugees in the public mind and to promote the
singling out of persons of particular races or religions for discrimination and hate-
based harassment. (2005: 29)

In Australia this process reached its peak in the 2001 federal election campaign
which centred predominantly on the issue of ‘border protection’. As Gale (2004)
argues, this fed into a populist politics that linked the ‘war on terror’ with the refugee
‘crisis’ and appealed to ‘ongoing historically based fears of the Other’ (2004: 335). A
similar process occurred in the 2010 and 2013 federal elections, further supporting
Stratton’s (2009b: 677) arguments regarding the way in which “asylum seekers are
understood to threaten the racialized, neoliberal order of Australian capitalism’. This
has led to an increased focus on the policing of Australia’s borders (Pickering &
Lambert 2002; Grewcock 2013; Weber & Pickering 2011) and, with the election of the
Abbott Liberal government in 2013, a change in name from the Department of
Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) to the Department of Immigration and Border
Protection (DIBP). It has been argued that recent policy changes have ‘increased the
risks of travel for unauthorised refugees, exacerbated abuses within Australian and
regional detention facilities and diminished the long-term prospects of resettlement
for this cohort’ (Grewcock 2013: 10).

Security and insecurity—external and internal ‘threats’

Globalisation, transnationalism, mass immigration, border protection policies, the
‘war on terror’, the refugee “crisis —these are all processes and events that have con-
tributed to the current ‘climate of fear’ that is said to pervade contemporary Australian
society. While 11 September 2001 is often described as ‘the day the world changed’
(Hodge & O’Carroll 2006: 135), we can identify a number of global and national pro-
cesses (such as economic restructuring) over a longer period of time that have led to
feelings of uncertainty and insecurity among many Australians (Stratton 2009b;
Pusey 2003). As Noble notes:

Australia exhibits the prevailing Western mood of existential insecurity: a world in
which we are no longer sure who we can trust, whether our identities and communities
are meaningful any more, whether we have any: but this is not simply the result of
September 11, it is the condition of late modernity. (2005: 119)

Recent incidents of racism towards Arabs and Muslims (Poynting 2009; Poynting &
Noble 2004; Noble 2005), as well as the December 2005 Cronulla riots, must be exam-
ined in the context of both global and national processes of change. While these events
require a more complex explanation than we are able to provide here (see Noble 2009;
Poynting 2007, 2008; Johanson & Glow 2007; Hopkins 2011), we can briefly comment
on some aspects of them.

The rise in racially based attacks on Australians of Arab background, particularly on
people ‘of national and ethnic origins commonly associated with the Islamic faith’,

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

began during the 1991 Gulf War (Poynting & Mason 2007; Poynting & Noble 2004).
The terrorist attacks in the United States on 11 September 2001 prompted another
outbreak of such incidents. A study of Arab and Muslim Australians undertaken for the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (Poynting & Noble 2004) found
that women were more likely than men, and Muslims more likely than non-Muslims,
to have experienced racism, abuse or violence since September 11. Poynting et al.
(2004) argue that these attacks reflect the emergence of ‘the Arab Other’ as the pre-
eminent folk devil in contemporary Australia that began in 1998 with the moral panics
over ‘ethnic gangs’ and the ‘race rapes’ in Sydney in 2000-2001 (see also Noble 2008).

The Cronulla riots (see also In Focus 5.2, earlier in this chapter) were prompted by
the physical attack on two surf lifesavers at North Cronulla Beach in Sydney by
Arabic-speaking men the weekend before. As Inglis has noted: “Volunteer lifesavers
have an iconic status in Australian culture. They provide an important community
service on the beaches, which symbolize a distinctive Australian lifestyle based on
surfing and enjoyment of the outdoors’ (Inglis 2006). Television coverage of the riots
showed images of

... a rampaging crowd of 5,000 youths bashing men whom the reporters described as
Middle Easterners. Many of those involved in the violence at Cronulla ... were drunk.
Some had draped themselves in large Australian flags, and the mob from time to
time sang the national anthem or shouted the catch cry of Australian sporting events,
“Ozzie, Ozzie, Ozzie, [sic] Oi, Oi, Oi’ as they found new victims. (Inglis 2006)

Poynting et al.’s (2004) identification of the fear of ‘the Arab Other’ is relevant to
understanding this incident. Importantly, however, so is the experience of marginali-
sation and lack of belonging identified by non-white and Muslim Australians that we
discussed earlier in this chapter (Hassan 2010). As Inglis (2002) argues, an excessive
focus by governments on the administrative control of migrants and refugee settlers
(‘border control’) ‘risk(s) the danger that this can actually increase migrant alienation
and make them reconsider the extent to which they are actually welcome in their
present abode’. This experience is reflected in the words of an Australian Muslim
woman who was born in Egypt:

... after September 11, it felt like our home, which Australia has been our home, for
almost all my life ... was somehow not our home anymore. This feeling that we were
foreigners here, and I’ve never felt like a foreigner, but ever since then I’ve started
feeling more like a foreigner. (Noble 2005: 117)

Sociologists argue that political and community leaders in Australia have a
responsibility to prevent the emergence of such hostilities, and that ‘in the longer
term there is an obvious need for policies supporting major public education pro-
grams to combat ignorance about Islam’ (Inglis 2002: 192). (See Chapter 12 for a
discussion of Islamophobia.)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @®

@ ETHNICITY AND NATIONAL IDENTITY

Benedict Anderson (1983) refers to the nation as an ‘imagined community’. As indi-
cated in the opening paragraph of this chapter, in Australia, as in most modern indus-
trial and post-industrial societies, tension exists between the principles of a unified
nation and a multicultural one (Guibernau & Rex 1997: 8; Moran 2011; Vasta 2013).
Australia’s postwar immigration program has offered a series of challenges to the
Australian nation as it has been imagined in the past. Globalisation processes mean
that ethnic diversity will continue to be a characteristic of Australia’s future (Hugo
2006; Castles et al. 2013; Carruthers 2013). How have ‘we’, the Australian people (that
is, both overseas-born and Australian-born), responded to these challenges? How do
we ‘imagine’ ourselves as a nation in light of these challenges?

In a paper published in 1993, Murray Goot asked the question: ‘Are Australians in
favour of multiculturalism or opposed to it?’ (1993: 226). On the basis of survey data
analysis, he concluded that multiculturalists appeared to outnumber monocultural-
ists, although the majority of Australians were caught ‘somewhere in between’ (1993:
226). As noted above, in Ang et al.’s (2002) study only 10 per cent of the sample held
negative views of multiculturalism. In a review of more recent research, Moran (2011:
2163) concludes that ‘the findings are suggestive of acceptance of multiculturalism
and diversity as features of Australian identity’. In their 2009 paper, Pietsch and
Marotta (2009: 191-2) provide a more complex picture. In their analysis of trends in
public acceptance of immigrants, they report fluctuating levels of support for immi-
gration between 1996 and 2007. More specifically, they report “a significant level of
acceptance of well-educated and skilled immigrants’ before 2004 but a decline in sup-
port for immigration since then. The growth in research on cosmopolitanism has
recognised, and attempted to make sense of, variations within Australian society with
respect to acceptance of immigration and multiculturalism (Lee 2010; Calcutt et al.
2009; Phillips & Smith 2008). Even more recently, sociologists have begun to explore
the concept of ‘whiteness’ (Monsour 2007; Twine & Gallagher 2008; Bonnett 2008)
which acknowledges that, for many Australians, there is a taken-for-granted accept-
ance that the Australian national identity is essentially a white identity (Koerner &
Haggis 2010; Stratton 2009a; Tascon 2008). This racialised understanding of
Australian identity leaves no room for the emergence of an inclusive Australian iden-
tity, a phenomenon that recent immigrants from African countries and Australians
of African descent are experiencing in everyday life (Mapedzahama & Kwansah-
Aidoo 2010; Phillips 2011).

What does this suggest about how we imagine Australia now and in the future?
More importantly, how does a sociological analysis of ethnicity contribute to an
understanding of the challenges to the Australian national imaginary brought about
by increasing levels of cultural diversity?

We can address this question by proposing two alternative models of multicultur-
alism. The first is a description of multiculturalism as presented in current Australian
policy. It is this version that dominates the public discourse on immigration and

LO6 Assess the
relationship between
ethnicity and Australian
national identity

nation

A political entity constituted by
a government assuming a legal
and moral right to exercise sole
jurisdiction over a particular
territory and its citizens.

imagined community
The term used by Benedict
Anderson (1983) to describe a
Nation. It emphasises that the
nation is conceived as a
homogeneous community with
a shared history, despite the
existence of diversity and
inequality within its boundary.
Imagined communities are
shared ideas of the nation
which are being contested and
reconstituted in the
contemporary world.

whiteness

A concept that points to the
ideological practices that render
white identity and privilege
invisible. There has been a
significant growth in ‘whiteness
studies’ since the 1990s.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

national identity in contemporary Australia and is therefore what many Australians
mean when they talk of ‘multiculturalism’. The second is an alternative conception of
multiculturalism that arises out of sociological understandings of ethnicity, recog-
nises the context of globalisation, and is underpinned by an understanding of the
social trends associated with the transition from modernity to postmodernity. This
version resonates more closely with the ‘lived experience’ of cultural diversity among
what Hage (1998) describes as the ‘third-world looking immigrants’ who are located
on the margins of Australian society—that is, a version of multiculturalism he labels
the ‘multicultural real’ (Hage 1998), and that Wise and Velayutham (2009) call ‘every-
day multiculturalism’.

In the first model, ethnicity is viewed as an essential, fixed and static characteristic
of ethnic minorities. This ‘ethnic mosaic’ model of ethnic relations comprises a
dominant core surrounded by a multiplicity of minority ‘ethnic’ cultures (meaning
the ‘cultures’ of immigrants from non-English-speaking backgrounds or those who
are culturally and linguistically different from the Anglo-Australian ‘core’ culture). It
is in this model that the hegemonic ethnicity (whiteness) of the dominant group
remains unmarked, as discussed earlier. The core culture of the dominant group is
defined as the national culture and forms the basis on which a national identity is
constructed. This national identity is itself imagined as homogeneous: it denies the
existence of cultural variation based on gender, sexuality, age, generation, class and
region within its boundaries. Ethnic cultures are typically defined in terms of sets of
cultural characteristics that do not threaten this national identity as imagined by
members of the dominant group. Thus, ethnic cultures are depoliticised and trans-
lated into a set of superficial characteristics, such as food, music and dance, which
enable members of the dominant group to experience ‘difference’ by consuming the
cultures of immigrant groups at multicultural fairs (such as Sydney’s Carnivale), cos-
mopolitan restaurants (for example, the fashion for Thai cuisine) and ethnic festivi-
ties (such as Vietnamese New Year in Melbourne) (Phillips 2010).

This form of multiculturalism incorporates ethnic minorities in Australian society
only insofar as they can contribute to the cosmopolitanism of the dominant group,
and thus only as ‘Other’. This form of multiculturalism is thus predominantly a policy
for the management of ethnic minorities. It involves strategies of exclusion alongside
a rhetoric of inclusion—that is, what Hage (1998) calls ‘the dialectic of inclusion and
exclusion’. In other words, this form of multiculturalism maintains the marginality
and liminality of immigrants and their descendants.

There is another view of multiculturalism, national identity and globalisation
that suggests an alternative and more positive future (Moran 2010, 2011). This is a
model of multiculturalism based on a conceptualisation of ethnicity as non-
essentialist, a view of national identity as a construction in process, and an under-
standing of globalisation as a set of processes that challenge the boundaries and
sovereignty of the nation-state. Rather than an ethnic mosaic model, the model is
one of flux and flow based on the interweaving of amorphous cultures (Lechte &
Bottomley 1993; Hodge & O’Carroll 2006). This is, in fact, what occurs at the level

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL IMAGINARY? @®

of the everyday among members of ethnic minorities in Australian suburbs of high
migrant density, where cultural diversity is negotiated on a daily basis (Wise &
Velayutham 2009; Carruthers 2011).

This model of multiculturalism offers a vision of the future that is not one of social
conflict between reified ‘ethnic’ cultures all competing for scarce resources; rather, it
is a vision of a negotiated social cohesion predicated on the acceptance of cultural
difference as an integral part of our postmodern future. Given the contradictory pro-
cesses highlighted throughout this chapter, we might ask ourselves which model of
multiculturalism we will adopt as we move into the future. And, more importantly,
who are ‘we’?

CONCLUSION
This chapter has argued for the advantages of adopting a sociological perspective on ‘ethnicity’. It has
demonstrated that an understanding of ethnicity as a social construction, rather than a biological ‘given’,

has very important implications for how we view immigrants (and their descendants) in Australian society,
how we imagine the Australian nation, and what we mean by ‘multiculturalism’. The study of ‘ethnicity’

and ‘ethnic relations’ is thus the study of all of us, not just those who are marginalised and labelled as
‘Other’. Given that cultural diversity is likely to be a central feature of Australian society in the context
of globalisation, understandings of ethnicity in social and political life are crucial factors in the shaping
of the nation’s future.

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

1. Select an ethnic category in Australia (e.g. Italian, Vietnamese, Indian, New Zealander). Use the
terms ‘ethnicity’, ‘ethnic identity’, ‘ethnic group’, ‘ethnic community’ and ‘ethnic minority’ to

describe and analyse the meaning and salience of ethnicity for members of this category. (LO1)

2. Think critically about your own biography and your social location in Australian society. In what
ways has ethnicity been a factor in your life history? (LO2)

3. In recent years, the proportion of skilled migrants and temporary migrants entering
Australia has been greater than the proportion arriving through the family stream and/or for
permanent settlement. How has this occurred and what are some of the implications of this
shift? (LO3)

4. What is meant by ‘multiculturalism’? Is Australia a ‘multicultural’ society? Provide evidence to
justify your answer. (LO4)

5. What is the relationship between ethnicity, class and gender in contemporary Australian
society? In your answer, focus on a specific area of social life such as health, education or
employment. (LO5)

6. Critically discuss the factors that contributed to the Cronulla riots. What benefits are there in
undertaking a sociological analysis of this event? (LO1, LO2, LO3, LO4 & LO5)

7. Discuss the relationship between an Australian national identity and social cohesion. (LO6)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


Es

J

4

ite:

N SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Ali, L. & Sonn, C.C. (2010) ‘Constructing Identity as a Second-Generation Cypriot Turkish in Australia: The
Multi-Hyphenated Other’, Culture Psychology, 16(3), pp. 416-36.

Anderson, B. (1983) Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of Nationalism, London, Verso.

Ang, |. (2000) ‘Asians in Australia: A Contradiction in Terms?’, in J. Docker & G. Fischer (eds), Race, Colour and
Identity in Australia and New Zealand, Sydney, University of NSW Press, pp. 115-30.

Ang, |. (2001) On Not Speaking Chinese: Living between Asia and the West, London, Routledge.

Ang, |., Brand, J., Noble, G. & Wilding, D. (2002) Living Diversity: Australia’s Multicultural Future, Artarmon, Special
Broadcasting Services Corporation.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2005) Migration, Australia, Cat. No. 3412.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009) Migration, Australia, Cat. No. 3412.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2013a) Migration, Australia, 2011-12 and 2012-13, Cat. No. 3412.0,
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/3412.0Chapter12011-12%20and%202012-13>,
accessed 23 January 2014.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2013b) Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012-2013,
Cat. No. 2071.0, <http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/207 1.0main+features902012-2013>,
accessed 23 January 2014.

Australian Ethnic Affairs Council (AEAC) (1977) Australia as a Multicultural Society, Canberra, AGPS.

Babacan, H. (2005) ‘Locating Second-Generation Migrants: Space, Place and Belonging’, Paper presented at
Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia (ASSA) Workshop, ‘Second Generation Migrants: Contesting
Definitions and Realities’, University of Queensland, 1-2 November 2005.

Baldassar, L. (1999) ‘Marias and Marriage: Ethnicity, Gender and Sexuality among Italo-Australian Youth in
Perth’, Journal of Sociology, 35(1), pp. 1-22.

Baldassar, L. (2001) Visits Home: Migration Experiences between Italy and Australia, Melbourne, Melbourne
University Press.

Baldassar, L., Baldock, C.V. & Wilding, R. (2007) Families Caring across Borders: Migration, Ageing and
Transnational Caregiving, Houndmills, UK, Palgrave Macmillan.

Baldassar, L. & Skrbis, Z. (1998) ‘The Second Generation and the Transmission of Culture’, in M. Alexander,
S. Harding, P. Harrison, G. Kendall, Z. Skrbis & J. Western (eds), Refashioning Sociology: Responses to the New
World , TASA Conference Proceedings, Brisbane, Queensland University of Technology, pp. 454-9.

Banks, M. (1996) Ethnicity: Anthropological Construction, London, Routledge.

Barth, F. (1969) ‘Introduction’, in F. Barth (ed.), Ethnic Groups and Boundaries: The Social Organization of Culture
Difference, Boston, Little, Brown, pp. 9-38.

Basch, L., Glick Schiller, N. & Szanton Blanc, C. (1994) Nations Unbound: Transnational Projects, Postcolonial
Predicaments, and Deterritorialized Nation-States, Langhorne, PA, Gordon & Breach.

Bhahba, H. (1990) ‘The Third Space: Interview with Homi Bhabha’, in J. Rutherford (ed.), identity: Community,
Culture, Difference, London, Lawrence & Wishart, pp. 201-21.

Bloch, B. & Dreher, T. (2009) ‘Resentment and Reluctance: Working with Everyday Diversity and Everyday
Racism in Southern Sydney’, Journal of Intercultural Studies, 30(2), pp. 193-209.

Bonnett, A. (2008) ‘Review article: White Studies revisited’, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 31(1), pp. 185-96.

Borowski, A. (2000) ‘Creating a Virtuous Society: Immigration and Australia’s Policies of Multiculturalism’,
Journal of Social Policy, 29, pp. 459-75.

Bottomley, G. (1979) After the Odyssey: A Study of Greek Australians, Brisbane, University of Queensland Press.

Bottomley, G. (1992) From Another Place: Migration and the Politics of Culture, Cambridge, Cambridge

University Press.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL I

Bottomley, G. (1997) ‘Identification: Ethnicity, Gender and Culture’, Journal of intercultural Studies, 18(1),
pp. 41-8.

Bottomley, G. & de Lepervanche, M. (eds) (1984) Ethnicity, Class and Gender in Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Bottomley, G., de Lepervanche, M. & Martin, J. (eds) (1991) Intersexions: Gender/Class/Culture/Ethnicity, Sydney,
Allen & Unwin.

Breton, R. (1964) ‘Institutional Completeness of Ethnic Communities and the Personal Relations of Immigrants’,
American Journal of Sociology, 70(2), pp. 193-205.

Calcutt, L., Woodward, I. & Skrbis, Z. (2009) ‘Conceptualizing Otherness: An Exploration of the Cosmopolitan
Schema’, Journal of Sociology, 45(2), pp. 169-86.

Carrington, K., McIntosh, A. & Walmsley, J. (eds) (2007) The Social Costs and Benefits of Migration, Centre for
Applied Research in Social Science, University of New England.

Carruthers, A. (2011) ‘Alternative Multicultural Subjectivities? Indochinese Cosmopolitanisms in Western
Sydney’, in K.A. Jacobs & J. Malpas (eds), Ocean to Outback: Cosmopolitanism in Contemporary Australia,
Crawley, WA, UWA Press.

Carruthers, A. (2013) ‘National Multiculturalism, Transnational Identities’, Journal of Intercultural Studies, 34(2),
pp. 214-28.

Castles, S. (1992) ‘Australian Multiculturalism: Social Policy and Identity ina Changing Society’, in G.P. Freeman
& J. Jupp (eds), Nations of immigrants: Australia, the United States and International Migration, Melbourne,
Oxford University Press.

Castles, S., Foster, W., Iredale, R. & Withers, G. (1998) Immigration and Australia: Myths and Realities, Sydney,
Allen & Unwin.

Castles, S., Hugo, G. & Vasta, E. (2013) ‘Rethinking Migration and Diversity in Australia: Introduction’, Journal of
Intercultural Studies, 34(2), pp. 115-21.

Castles, S., Kalantzis, M., Cope, B. & Morrissey, M. (1992) Mistaken identity: Multiculturalism and the Demise of
Nationalism in Australia, 3rd edn, Sydney, Pluto Press.

Castles, S. & Miller, M. (1998) The Age of Migration: International Population Movements in the Modern World,
2nd edn, London, Macmillan.

Cobb-Clark, D. (2000) ‘Do Selection Criteria Make a Difference? Visa Category and the Labour Market Status of
Immigrants to Australia’, Economic Record, 76(232), pp. 15-31.

Cohen, E. (2004) ‘I Am My Own Culture: The “Individual Migrant” and the “Migrant Community”, a Latin
American Case Study in Australia’, Journal of Intercultural Studies, 25(2), pp. 123-42.

Cohen, R. (1997) Global Diasporas: An Introduction, London, UCL Press.

Colic-Peisker, V. (2002) ‘Croatians in Western Australia: Migration, Language and Class’, Journal of Sociology,
38(2), pp. 149-66.

Colic-Peisker, V. (2010) ‘Australian Immigration and Settlement in the 21st Century: Who Comes in and How
Do They Fare?’, Conference Proceedings, The Annual Conference of the Australian Sociological Association,
Macquarie University, Sydney, 6-9 December 2010.

Colic-Peisker, V. (2011) ‘A New Era in Australian Multiculturalism? From Working-class “Ethnics” to a
Multicultural Middle-class’, International Migration Review, 45(3), pp. 562-87.

Colic-Peisker, V. & Tilbury, F. (2006) ‘Employment Niches for Recent Refugees: Segmented Labour Market of
the 21st Century Australia’, Journal of Refugee Studies, 19(2), pp. 203-29.

Colic-Peisker, V. & Tilbury, F. (2007) ‘Integration into the Australian Labour Market: The Experience of Three
‘Visibly Different” Groups of Recently Arrived Refugees’, International Migration, 45(1), pp. 59-85.

Collins, J. (1978) ‘Fragmentation of the Working Class’, in E.L. Wheelwright & K. Buckley (eds), Essays in the Political
Economy of Australian Capitalism, Vol. 3, Sydney, Australia and New Zealand Book Company, pp. 42-85.

Collins, J. (1984) ‘Immigration and Class: The Australian Experience’, in G. Bottomley & M. de Lepervanche
(eds), Ethnicity, Class and Gender in Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin, pp. 1-27.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Collins, J. (1991) Migrant Hands in a Distant Land: Australia’s Post-War Immigration, 2nd edn, Sydney, Pluto Press.

Collins, J. (1996) ‘The Changing Political Economy of Australian Racism’, in E. Vasta & S. Castles (eds), The Teeth
Are Smiling: The Persistence of Racism in Multicultural Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin, pp. 73-96.

Collins, J., Noble, G., Poynting, S. & Tabar, P. (2000) Kebabs, Kids, Cops and Crime: Youth, Ethnicity and Crime,
Sydney, Pluto Press.

Cornell, S. & Hartmann, D. (1998) Ethnicity and Race: Making Identities in a Changing World, Thousand Oaks, CA,
Pine Forge.

de Lepervanche, M. (1975) ‘Australian Immigrants: 1788-1940: Desired and Unwanted’, in E.L. Wheelwright &
K. Buckley (eds), Essays in the Political Economy of Australian Capitalism, Vol. 1, Sydney, Australia and New
Zealand Book Company, pp. 72-103.

de Lepervanche, M. (1980) ‘From Race to Ethnicity’, Australian and New Zealand Journal of Sociology, 16(1),
pp. 24-37.

Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) (2010a) Population Flows: Immigration Aspects, 2008-09
Edition, Canberra, Commonwealth of Australia.

Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) (2010b) Fact Sheet 60—Australia’s Refugee and Humanitarian
Program, <www.immi.gov.au/media/fact-sheets/60refugee.htm>, accessed 22 March 2011.

Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) (2011a) A Significant Contribution: The Economic, Social and
Civic Contributions of First and Second Generation Humanitarian Entrants. Summary of Findings, Canberra,
Commonwealth of Australia.

Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) (2011b) The Australian People: Australia’s Multicultural Policy,
Canberra, Commonwealth of Australia, <http://www.immi.gov.au/media/publications/multicultural/pdf_
doc/people-of-australia-multicultural-policy-booklet.pdf>, accessed 15 January 2014.

Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) (2013a) Australia’s Migration Trends 2011-2012 at a Glance,
<http://www.immi.gov.au/media/publications/statistics/immigration-update/australian-migration-
trends-2011-12-glance.pdf>, accessed 14 January 2014.

Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) (2013b) Australia’s Migration Trends 2011-2012,
<http://www.immi.gov.au/media/publications/statistics/immigration-update/australian-migration-
trends-2011-12.pdf>, accessed 14 January 2014.

Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (DIMA) (2006) Annual Report 2005-6, <www.immi.gov.
au/about/reports/annual/2005-06/DIMA_AR/default.html>, accessed 12 February 2011.

Dunn, K.M. (2005) ‘A Paradigm of Transnationalism for Migration Studies’, New Zealand Population Review,
31(2), pp. 15-31.

Evans, M.D.R. & Kelley, J. (1991) ‘Prejudice, Discrimination, and the Labor Market: Attainments of Immigrants
in Australia’, American Journal of Sociology, 97(3), pp. 721-59.

Feller, E. (2005) ‘Refugees Are Not Migrants’, Refugee Survey Quarterly, 24(4), pp. 27-35.

Fincher, R. (1997) ‘Gender, Age, and Ethnicity in Immigration for an Australian Nation’, Environment and
Planning A, 29, pp. 217-36.

Gal Atem, P. (2010) ‘An Investigation of the Challenges Facing African Refugee Communities in the Australian
Workforce: Findings from a Qualitative Study of Sudanese and Liberian Refugees in South Australia’,
Conference Proceedings, The Annual Conference of the Australian Sociological Association, Macquarie

University, Sydney, 6-9 December 2010.

Gale, P. (2004) ‘The Refugee Crisis and Fear: Populist Politics and Media Discourse’, Journal of Sociology,
40(4), 321-40.

Gans, H. (1979) ‘Symbolic Ethnicity: The Future of Ethnic Groups and Cultures in America’, Ethnic and Racial
Studies, 2(1), pp. 9-17.

Giddens, A. (1991) Modernity and Self-identity, Cambridge, Polity Press.

Gilroy, P. (1987) There Ain’t No Black in the Union Jack, London, Unwin Hyman.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL |

Giorgas, D. & Jones, F.L. (2002) ‘Intermarriage Patterns and Social Cohesion among First, Second and Later
Generation Australians’, Journal of Population Research, 19(1), pp. 47-64.

Goot, M. (1993) ‘Multiculturalists, Monoculturalists and the Many in Between: Attitudes to Cultural Diversity
and Their Correlates’, Australian and New Zealand Journal of Sociology, 29(2), pp. 226-53.

Grewcock, M. (2013) ‘Australia’s Ongoing Border Wars’, Race and Class, 54(3), pp. 10-32.

Guibernau, M. & Rex, J. (eds) (1997) ‘Introduction’, in The Ethnicity Reader: Nationalism, Multiculturalism and
Migration, Cambridge, Polity Press, pp. 1-12.

Hage, G. (1998) White Nation: Fantasies of White Supremacy in a Multicultural Society, Sydney, Pluto Press.

Hall, S. (1992a) ‘The New Ethnicities’, in J. Donald & A. Rattansi (eds), Race, Culture and Difference, London, Sage.

Hall, S. (1992b) ‘The Question of Cultural Identity’, in S. Hall, D. Held & T. McGrew (eds), Modernity and Its
Futures, Cambridge, Polity Press/Open University, pp. 276-326.

Hannerz, U. (1996) Transnational Connections: Culture, People, Places, London, Routledge.

Hassan, R. (2010) ‘Socio-economic marginalisation of Muslims in Contemporary Australia: Implications for
Social Inclusion, Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs, 30(4), pp. 575-84.

Heard, G., Khoo, S. & Birrell, B. (2009) Intermarriage in Australia: Patterns by Birthplace, Ancestry, Religion and
Indigenous Status, Clayton, Victoria, Centre for Population and Urban Research, Monash University.

Hinz, B. (2010) ‘Ethnic Associations, Networks and the Construction of Australian Multiculturalism’, Paper presented
at the Canadian Political Science Association Annual Conference, Concordia University, Montreal, 1-3 June 2010.

Ho, C. & Alcorso, C. (2004) ‘Migrants and Employment: Challenging the Success Story’, Journal of Sociology,
40(3), pp. 237-59.

Hodge, B. & O’Carroll, J. (2006) Borderwork in Multicultural Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Holton, R. (1994) ‘Social Aspects of Immigration’, in M. Wooden, R. Holton, G. Hugo & J. Sloan (eds), Australian
Immigration: A Survey of the Issues, Canberra, AGPS, pp. 158-217.

Hopkins, L. (2011) ‘A Contested Identity: Resisting the Category Muslim-Australian’, Immigrants & Minorities,
29(1), pp. 110-31.

Hugo, G. (2006) ‘Globalization and Changes in Australian International Migration’, Journal of Population
Research, 23(2), pp. 107-34.

Hugo, G. (2011) The Economic, Social and Civic Contributions of First and Second Generation Humanitarian
Entrants. Final Report to Department of Immigration and Citizenship. Canberra, Department of Immigration
and Citizenship.

Hutchinson, J. & Smith, A.D. (eds) (1996) ‘Introduction’, in Ethnicity, Oxford, Oxford University Press, pp. 3-14.

Inglis, C. (2002) ‘Transnationalism: An Australian Perspective’, The Brown Journal of World Affairs, Winter, VIII(2),
pp. 181-93.

Inglis, C. (2006) ‘On the Beach: Racial Confrontation in Australia’, Migration Information Source, February 2006,
<www.migrationinformation.org/Feature/display.cfm?id=377>, accessed 12 February 2011.

Ip, D., Kawakami, |., Duivenvoorden, K. & Tye, L.C. (1994) Images of Asians in Multicultural Australia, Sydney,
Multicultural Centre, University of Sydney.

Iredale, R. & D’Arcy, B. (1992) The Continuing Struggle: Refugees in the Australian Labour Market, Bureau of
Immigration Research, Canberra, AGPS.

Jacobs, K. (2011) Experience and Representation: Contemporary Perspectives on Migration in Australia, Surrey,
UK, Ashgate.

Jamrozik, A., Boland, C. & Urquhart, R. (1995) Social Change and Cultural Transformation in Australia, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Jayasuriya, L. (1989) ‘The Facts, Policies and Rhetoric of Multiculturalism’, in T. Jagtenberg & P. D’Alton (eds),
Four Dimensional Social Space, Sydney, Harper & Row, pp. 166-73.

Jayasuriya, L. (2008) ‘Australian Multiculturalism Reframed’, Australian Quarterly, 80(3), pp. 27-30.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e



SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Johanson, K. & Glow, H. (2007) ‘Re-Thinking Multiculturalism: Performing the Cronulla Beach Riot’, The
International Journal of the Humanities, 5(3), pp. 37-43.

Julian, R. (1998) “I Love Driving!”: Alternative Constructions of Hmong Femininity in the West’, Race, Gender
and Class, 5(2), pp. 30-53.

Julian, R. (2001) ‘Dutch Settlement in Tasmania’, in J. Jupp (ed.), The Australian People: An Encyclopedia of the
Nation, Its People and Their Origins, 2nd edn, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, pp. 270-2.

Julian, R. (2004) ‘Living Locally, Dreaming Globally: Transnational Cultural Imaginings and Practices in the
Hmong Diaspora’, in N. Tapp & G.Y. Lee (eds), The Hmong of Australia: Culture and Diaspora, Canberra,
Pandanus Books, pp. 25-57.

Julian, R. (2004/05) ‘Hmong Transnational Identity: The Gendering of Contested Discourses’, Hmong Studies
Journal, 5, pp. 1-23.

Julian, R. (2006) ‘The Legacy of Abel Tasman: Post-war Dutch Settlement in Tasmania’, in N. Peters
(co-ordinating author), The Dutch Down Under: 1606-2006, Sydney, Wolters Kluwer, pp. 184-203.

Jupp, J. (1998) Immigration, 2nd edn, Melbourne, Oxford University Press.

Jupp, J. (2002) From White Australia to Woomera: The Story of Australian Immigration, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Khoo, S.E. (1994) ‘Correlates of Welfare Dependency among Immigrants in Australia’, International Migration
Review, 28(1), pp. 68-92.

Khoo, S.E. (2002) Second Generation Australians, Canberra, Australian Centre for Population Research and the
Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, <http://www.immi.gov.au/media/
publications/multicultural/2gen/sg_australians.pdf>, accessed 15 January 2014.

Khoo, S.E., McDonald, P., Giorgas, D. & Birrell, R. (2002) Second Generation Australians, Report forthe Department
of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, Canberra, Commonwealth of Australia.

Koerner, C. & Haggis, J. (2010) ‘We’re Multicultural Mate! Regional Australian Discourses of Multiculturalism
and the Reproduction of “White Australia” as a National Identity’, Conference Proceedings, The Annual
Conference of the Australian Sociological Association, Macquarie University, Sydney, 6-9 December 2010.

Lechte, J. & Bottomley, G. (1993) ‘Difference, Postmodernity and Image in Multicultural Australia’, in G.L.
Clark, D. Forbes & R. Francis (eds), Multiculturalism, Difference and Postmodernism, Melbourne, Longman
Cheshire, pp. 22-37.

Lee, R. (2010) ‘On the Margins of Belonging: Confronting Cosmopolitanism in the Late Modern Age’, Journal
of Sociology, 46(2), pp. 169-86.

Lo, J. (2000) ‘Beyond Happy Hybridity: Performing Asian-Australian Identities’, in |. Ang, S. Chalmers, L. Law
& M. Thomas (eds), Alter/Asians: Asian-Australian Identities in Art, Media and Popular Culture, Sydney, Pluto
Press, pp. 152-68.

McCall, G., Burnley, I.H. & Encel, S. (1985) ‘Introduction: Issues, Ideas and Ideology’, in |. Burnley, S. Encel &
G. McCall (eds), Immigration and Ethnicity in the 1980s, Melbourne, Longman Cheshire, pp. 1-39.

McKay, J. & Lewins, F. (1978) ‘Ethnicity and the Ethnic Group: A Conceptual Analysis and Reformulation’, Ethnic
and Racial Studies, 1(4), pp. 412-17.

Mann, J. (2012) ‘The Introduction of Multiculturalism in Canada and Australia, 1960s—1970s’, Nations and
Nationalism, 18(3), pp. 483-503.

Mapedzahama, V. & Kwansah-Aidoo, K. (2010) ‘Where Are You From? The Paradox of African Identity and
Belonging in Australia’, Conference Proceedings, The Annual Conference of the Australian Sociological

Association, Macquarie University, Sydney, 6-9 December 2010.

Martin, J. (1984) ‘Non-English-speaking Women: Production and Social Reproduction’, in G. Bottomley & M. de
Lepervanche (eds), Ethnicity, Class and Gender in Australia, Sydney, Allen & Unwin, pp. 109-22.

Matereke, K. (2009) “Embracing the Aussie Identity”: Theoretical Reflections on Challenges and Prospects for
African-Australian Youths’, The Australasian Review of African Studies, 30(1), pp. 129-43.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL I

Monsour, A. (2007) ‘Becoming White: How Early Syrian/Lebanese in Australia Recognised the Value of
Whiteness’ in L. Boucher, J. Carey & K. Ellinghaus (eds), Historicising Whiteness: Transnational Perspectives on
the Construction of an Identity, Melbourne, Vic., RMIT Publishing in association with the School of Historical
Studies, University of Melbourne, pp. 124-32. <http://search.informit.com.au/documentSummary;dn=83
6209890873003;res=IELIND> EISBN: 9781921166808. Accessed 24 January 2014.

Moran, A. (2010) ‘Multiculturalism and Australian National Identity’, Conference Proceedings, The Annual
Conference of the Australian Sociological Association, Macquarie University, Sydney, 6-9 December 2010.

Moran, A. (2011) ‘Multiculturalism as Nation-Building in Australia: Inclusive National Identity and the Embrace
of Diversity’, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 34(12), pp. 2153-72.

Murphy, J. & Williams, L. (1996) ‘Social Security Support and Recently-Arrived Immigrants’, People and Place,
4(2), pp. 15-20.

Ndhlovu, F. (2009) ‘The Limitations of Language and Nationality as Prime Markers of African Diaspora Identities
in the State of Victoria, African Identities, 7(1), pp. 17-32.

Ndhlovu, F. (2013) ‘Language Nesting, Superdiversity and African Diasporas in Regional Australia’, Australian
Journal of Linguistics, 33(4), pp. 426-48.

Noble, G. (2005) ‘The Discomfort of Strangers: Racism, Incivility and Ontological Security in a Relaxed and
Comfortable Nation’, Journal of Intercultural Studies, 26(1), pp. 107-20.

Noble, G. (2008) ‘The Face of Evil: Demonising the Arab Other in Contemporary Australia, Cultural Studies
Review, 14(2), pp. 13-33.

Noble, G. (ed.) (2009) Lines in the Sand: The Cronulla Riots, Multiculturalism and National Belonging, Sydney,
Institute of Criminology.

Noble, G., Poynting, S. & Tabar, P. (1999) ‘Lebanese Youth and Social Identity’, in R. White (ed.), Australian Youth
Subcultures: On the Margins and in the Mainstream, Hobart, Australian Clearinghouse for Youth Studies,
pp. 130-7.

Papastergiardis, N. (2000) The Turbulence of Migration: Globalization, Deterritorialization, and Hybridity, Malden,
MA, Polity in association with Blackwell Publishers.

Pe-Pua, R. (1996) ‘We’re Just Like Other Kids’: Street-frequenting Youth of Non-English-speaking Background, PQ ee
Canberra, AGPS.

Perrin, R-L. & Dunn, K.M. (2007) ‘Tracking the Settlement of North African Immigrants: Speculations on the
Social and Cultural Impacts of a Newly Arrived Immigrant Group’, Australian Geographer, 38(2), pp. 253-73.

Phillips, M. (2010) ‘Trying to Get Off the Multicultural Merry-Go-Round’, Conference Proceedings, The Annual
Conference of the Australian Sociological Association, Macquarie University, Sydney, 6-9 December 2010.

Phillips, M. (2011) ‘Convenient Labels, Inaccurate Representations: Turning Southern Sudanese Refugees into

UT

“African-Australians”, Australasian Review of African Studies, 32(2), pp. 57-79.
Phillips, T. & Smith, P. (2008) ‘Cosmopolitan Beliefs and Cosmopolitan Practices: An Empirical Investigation’,
Journal of Sociology, 44(4), pp. 391-9.
Pickering, S. & Lambert, C. (2002) ‘Deterrence: Australia’s Refugee Policy’, Current Issues in Criminal Justice,
14(1), pp. 65-86.
Pietsch, J. & Marotta, V. (2009) ‘Bauman, Strangerhood and Attitudes Towards Immigrants among the
Australian Population’, Journal of Sociology, 45(2), pp. 187-200. ; j
Poynting, S. (2007) “Thugs” and “Grubs” at Cronulla: From Media Beat-ups to Beating up Migrants’, in
S. Poynting & G. Morgan (eds), Outrageous! Moral Panics in Australia, Hobart, ACYS Publishing, pp. 158-70.
Poynting, S. (2008) ‘The Attack on “Political Correctness”: Islamaphobia and the Erosion of Multiculturalism in
Australia under the Howard Regime, Social Alternatives, 27(1), pp. 5-9.
Poynting, S. (2009) ‘The “Lost” Girls: Muslim Young Women in Australia’, Journal of Intercultural Studies, 30(4),
pp. 373-86.
Poynting, S. & Mason, V. (2006) “Tolerance, Freedom, Justice and Peace”? Britain, Australia and Anti-Muslim
Racism since 11 September 2001’, Journal of Intercultural Studies, 27(4), pp. 365-91.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Poynting, S. & Mason, V. (2007) ‘The Resistable Rise of Islamaphobia: Anti-Muslim Racism in the UK and
Australia before 11 September 2001’, Journal of Sociology, 43(1), pp. 61-86.

Poynting, S. & Noble, G. (2004) Living with Racism: The Experience and Reporting by Arab and Muslim Australians
of Discrimination, Abuse and Violence since 11 September 2001, Report to the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission, Centre for Cultural Research, University of Western Sydney.

Poynting, S., Noble, G., Tabar, P. & Collins, J. (2004) Bin Laden in the Suburbs: Criminalising the Arab Other,
Sydney, Institute of Criminology/Federation Press.

Price, C. (1985) ‘The Ethnic Composition of the Australian Population’, in |. Burnley, S. Encel & G. McCall (eds),
Immigration and Ethnicity in the 1980s, Melbourne, Longman Cheshire, pp. 43-57.

Price, C. (1994) ‘Ethnic Intermixture in Australia’, People and Place, 2(4), pp. 8-11.

Pusey, M. (2003) The Experience of Middle Australia: The Dark Side of Economic Reform, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Richardson, S.F.R., Robertson, F. & Ilsley, D. (2001) The Labour Force Experience of New Migrants, Adelaide,
Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs.

Richardson, S., Miller-Lewis, L., Ngo, P. & llsley, D. (2002) Life in a New Land: The Experience of Migrants in Wave
1 of LSIA 1 and LSIA 2, Report to the Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs,
Canberra, Commonwealth of Australia.

Said, E. (1978) Orientalism, New York, Random House.

Sala, E., Dandy, J. & Rapley, M. (2010) “Real Italians and Wogs”: The Discursive Construction of Italian Identity
among First Generation Italian Immigrants in Western Australia’, Journal of Community and Applied Social
Psychology, 20, pp. 110-24.

Schech, S. & Haggis, J. (2001) ‘Migrancy, Multiculturalism and Whiteness: Re-charting Core Identities in
Australia’, Communal/Plural, 9(2), pp. 143-59.

Skrbis, Z. (1999) Long-Distance Nationalism, Aldershot, UK, Ashgate.

Song, M. (2003) Choosing Ethnic Identity, Cambridge, Polity Press.

Spivak, G.C. (1990) Post-Colonial Critic, London, Routledge.

Stratton, J. (2009a) ‘Preserving White Hegemony: Skilled Migration, “Asians” and Middle-class Assimilation’,
borderlands, 8(3), pp. 1-28.

Stratton, J. (2009b) ‘Uncertain Lives: Migration, the Border and Neoliberalism in Australia’, Social Identities,
15(5), pp. 677-92.

Tan, C. (2006) “The Tyranny of Appearance”: Chinese Australian Identities and the Politics of Difference’,
Journal of Intercultural Studies, 27(1-2), pp. 65-82.

Tascon, S.M. (2008) ‘Narratives of Race and Nation: Everyday Whiteness in Australia’, Social Identities, 14(2),
pp. 253-74.

Tate, J.W. (2009) ‘John Howard's “Nation”: Multiculturalism, Citizenship, and Identity’, Australian Journal of
Politics and History, 55(1), pp. 97-120.

Tsolidas, G. (2005) ‘Ambivalence as Geneology—Mothers and Daughters Imagining Diasporic Subjectivities’,
Paper presented at Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia (ASSA) Workshop, ‘Second Generation
Migrants: Contesting Definitions and Realities’, University of Queensland, 1-2 November 2005.

Twine, F.W. & Gallagher, C. (2008) ‘Introduction: The Future of Whiteness: A Map of the “Third Wave”, Ethnic
and Racial Studies, 31(1), pp. 4-24.

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) (1951) Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees,
Geneva, UNHCR.

Van Hear, N. (1998) New Diasporas: The Mass Exodus, Dispersal and Regrouping of Migrant Communities, London,

University College London Press.
Vasta, E. (1993) ‘Multiculturalism and Ethnic Identity: The Relationship between Racism and Resistance’,
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Sociology, 29(2), pp. 209-25.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 5 ETHNICITY AND IMMIGRATION: CHALLENGING THE NATIONAL |

Vasta, E. (1995) ‘Youth and Ethnicity: The Second Generation’, in C. Guerra & R. White (eds), Ethnic Minority
Youth, Hobart, National Clearinghouse for Youth Studies, pp. 55-67.

Vasta, E. (2013) ‘Do We Need Social Cohesion in the 21st Century? Multiple Languages of Belonging in the
Metropolis’, Journal of Intercultural Studies, 34(2), pp. 196-213.

Vertovec, S. (2007) ‘Super-diversity and Its Implications’, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 29(6), pp. 1024-54.

Wadham, B. (2003) ‘The Turn to Whiteness: Race, Nation and Cultural Sociology’, Conference proceedings of
the Australian Sociological Association Conference, University of New England, 4-6 December 2003.

Weber, L. & Pickering, S. (2011) Globalisation and Borders: Death at the Global Frontier, Hampshire, Palgrave
Macmillan.

Weber, M. ([1922] 1968) Economy and Society, Los Angeles, University of California Press.

Weber, M. (1964) The Theory of Economic and Social Organisation, trans. AM. Henderson & T. Parsons, New
York, The Free Press.

White, R. (2007) ‘Taking It To the Streets: The Larrikins and the Lebanese’, in $. Poynting & G. Morgan (eds),
Outrageous! Moral Panics in Australia, Hobart, ACYS Publishing, pp. 40-52.

White, R. (2009) ‘Disputed Definitions and Fluid Identities: The Limitations of Social Profiling in Relation to
Ethnic Youth Gangs’, Youth Justice, 8(2), pp. 149-61.

White, R., Perrone, S., Guerra, C. & Lampugnani, R. (1999) Ethnic Youth Gangs in Australia. Do They Exist?
Overview Report, Australian Multicultural Foundation.

Williams, L. & McKenzie, F. (1996) Understanding Australia’s Population, Canberra, AGPS.

Windle, J. (2004) ‘The Ethnic (Dis)jadvantage Debate Revisited: Turkish Background Students in Australia’,
Journal of intercultural Studies, 25(3), pp. 271-86.

Wise, A. (2009) “It’s Just an Attitude That You Feel”: Inter-ethnic Habitus before the Cronulla Riots’, in G. Noble
(ed.), Lines in the Sand: The Cronulla Riots, Multiculturalism and National Belonging, Sydney, Institute of
Criminology Press, pp. 127-45.

Wise, A. & Velayutham, S. (2009) Everyday Multiculturalism, Houndmills, Basingstoke, UK, Palgrave Macmillan.

Woelz-Stirling, N., Manderson, L., Kelaher, M. & Benedicto, A. (2001) ‘Young Women in Conflict: Filipinas
Growing up in Australia’, Journal of Intercultural Studies, 22(3), pp. 295-306.

Wooden, M., Holton, R., Hugo, G. & Sloan, J. (eds) (1994) Australian Immigration: A Survey of the Issues,
Canberra, AGPS.

Zevallos, Z. (2003) “That's My Australian Side”: The Ethnicity, Gender and Sexuality of Young Australian
Women of South and Central American Origin’, Journal of Sociology, 39(1), pp. 81-98.

Zevallos, Z. (2004) ‘Where Are “Wogs” From? Exploring Subjective Understandings of Racism’, Conference
proceedings of the Australian Sociological Association Conference, LaTrobe University, Beechworth, 8-11
December 2004.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6

THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION

This chapter begins with a wide-ranging discussion of some competing theories ab
role education plays in contemporary societies.
MH Therole of economic rationalism in the shaping of educational policy is reviewed,
with particular emphasis on efficiency, market orientation, direct state control and
instrumentalism.
— The impact of policy changes on students from economically disadvantaged backgi
is explored. Using Pierre Bourdieu’s concept of ‘cultural capital; the implication of
educational stratification is linked to the changing economy and the positions of the
educationally advantaged and disadvantaged within it.
M The ‘gender debate’ within education is then discussed in the broader context of gender
and power in society in general. I
HH Finally, the importance of new technologies—the combinations of print, oral, visual
multimediated communications—which will become key to the labour market of the
future, is discussed in terms of those currently becoming literate in these areas. It i:
that those able to afford to go to schools with the equipment and expertise to teach
literacies will be a good deal better off than those who cannot. In such an environm: =
social disadvantage is likely not to be reduced but to be increased.

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:

LO1 Understand the structure of the Australi
education system

LO2 Analyse the dynamic social role of edi

LO3 Discuss the impact of education on the
individual and on social mobility

LO4 Explore the impact of economic rationa
on the different education sectors

LOS Consider the changing nature of the:
and the role of knowledge as a commo

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION @®

What is a good society? Why do we educate? How and what should we be teaching in
order to achieve a good society?

(From a free postcard picked up at a cafe in Melbourne)

Education, like many of the other issues covered in this book, is of concern to almost
everyone who lives in contemporary society, and something which can provoke vigor-
ous debate in any forum. The reason for this is simple: there is a powerful link between
an individual’s education level, their occupation and, ultimately, their income level. In
addition, it is in the field of education that many of the social and cultural attitudes
that underpin modern societies are reproduced, through both the curriculum and the
hidden curriculum. Finally, schools play an important role in the development of
identities: they are agents of socialisation.

In this chapter there is an exploration of some of the educational issues being
debated in contemporary Australia. In particular, there is a focus on the role educa-
tion plays in society, on the organisation of Australia’s education system, on some of
the educational theories available to explain the ways in which education functions,
on the impact of education on people from different socioeconomic groups, and on
males and females. Finally, the role and aims of the state in both resourcing and struc-
turing the education system are explored.

Mi WHO IS DOING IT—AND WHY?

The field of organised education is very broad in Australia, and is something individu-
als engage with from an early age. Almost 86 per cent of children attend pre-school,
for example, starting from the age of three years, and many will have been to child care
before that (Australian Bureau of Statistics, ABS 2009). Here they start to learn the
skills necessary to start primary education, which begins when they are between five
and six (depending on the state or territory in which they live)—to listen to teachers,
to obey instructions, to undertake structured educational tasks. Compulsory schooling
continues until the age of 15 in the Northern Territory, New South Wales and the
Australian Capital Territory, 16 in Victoria and South Australia, and 17 in Queensland,
Tasmania and Western Australia (either in schools or another training institution).
There is a strong correlation between education levels and income levels: in the United
Kingdom, Canada, the United States and Australia, an extra year of high school gives
students between 10 and 14 per cent more income every year of their working life (see
Leigh & Ryan 2008). Perhaps not surprisingly, one’s income increases even more after
a tertiary education (see Figure 6.1) and the effect is intergenerational—the children of
parents with degrees are more likely to gain degrees themselves, and thereafter con-
tinue to earn a higher income (Chesters, Ryan & Sinning 2013). In 2010, people aged
25-54 years without Year 12 or non-school qualifications were more than twice as
likely to be unemployed or outside the labour force as people with a bachelor degree
or graduate qualification (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, AIHW 2011).
It also became clear that Australia’s future economic prosperity lay with having a
smarter population which could compete with those from other developed nations,

curriculum

The overall design of an
educational program (what
should be focused on, for
example) and the individual
subjects through which the
aims of the educational
program might be achieved.

hidden curriculum

The social learning that occurs
within the education system
and which is not an official part
of the curriculum. This involves
learning a large range of social
conventions, learning about
one’s particular role in the social
hierarchy and the expectations
that follow from this.

LO1 Understand
the structure of the
Australian education
system

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Ce YS (58s!) Median weekly earnings by level of highest educational attainment

Year 10 or below
Year 11
Year 12

Certificate III/IV

Diploma/
Advanced Diploma

Bachelor Degree

Graduate Certificate/
Diploma or above

$

fo)

$500 $1000 $1500

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009) Education and Training Experience, Cat. No. 6278.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

rather than relying on an economy solely based on primary industry, as we had in the
past. Over the past two decades, more and more Australians have entered universities
and Technical and Further Education (TAFE) colleges, which are the two largest pro-
viders of post-compulsory education. Tertiary education, as we will see later in the
chapter, has stopped being the privilege of only the elites, and has been restructured
and ‘rebadged’ in order both to offer contemporary, useful qualifications and to
appeal to a broader section of the population. In 2010, for example, 56 per cent of
Australians between the ages of 15 and 64 had a non-school qualification (AIHW
2011). Figure 6.2 shows the educational background of Australia’s population by age.
As you can see, there is a large disparity between the old and the young in terms of
how long they have spent in formal education.

Aside from formal education where the student receives a widely recognised
qualification, there are also different types of non-formal education. Sometimes it is
structured, taught in educational institutions and organisations and workplaces, but

So

TUS 1584) Level of highest educational attainment by age group: 15-64 years
choc]
2515]

an hall ints i

Graduate Bachelor Diploma/ Certificate Year 12 Year 11 Year 10

Percentage

Certificate/ Degree Advanced III/IV or below
Diploma Diploma
or above

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009) Education and Training Experience, Cat. No. 6278.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION @®

does not lead to a formal qualification. Examples of this might be: work-related edu-
cation (for example, professional development); adult education (often provided by
adult education institutes, which teach everything from adult literacy to advanced
computer skills, to mosaic making, to Arabic); and the University of the Third Age,
which is staffed and used by older Australians who teach particular skills or subjects
and learn others.

Finally, there is a range of non-institutional learning activities which are related to
the community, to hobbies, the family or health (following a cooking blog, for exam-
ple, or watching a YouTube clip on how to change a car tyre). There are also an
increasing number of MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) which offer anyone
with internet access the ability to participate in university courses (Coursera, Udacity
and edX are examples).

As can be seen from Figure 6.3, Australians are enthusiastic learners and consu-
mers of the wide range of learning opportunities open to them given that the percent-
ages in the figure record people’s engagement with these forms of education just over
the previous year.

It is often argued that we live in an ‘information age’ in which the means of com-
municating information are multiplying and, as a corollary, people’s consumption of
information is increasing rapidly. In other words, this consumption is increased by the
technology we now have available to us. How often have you used the internet (on a
smartphone, an iPad, a laptop or a desktop) to get the information you need—from
basic things such as public transport timetables or the weather in Brisbane, to the
learning management system used by your university or an academic journal article
you need for an assignment? Our ability to find information quickly, accurately and
cheaply is growing, and this has impacted on the ways we now think about informa-
tion; education is now less about learning information than it is about having the
capacity to find out what you need to know, when you need to know it. To use a simple
example, why would someone spend the time learning a poem or the Periodic Table
by heart when it can be downloaded to their mobile within seconds—if they need it?

How might we explore what you have just read from a sociological point of view?

Fricure 6.3) Types of learning by age group: 15-64 years

90
80 - Formal learning

70 + i Non-formal learning
60 4 Informal learning

504
40+
30 4
20 >
10+

0
15-24 ' 2534 | 35-44 |' 45-54 | 55-64

Percentage

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2009) Education and Training Experience, Cat. No. 6278.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO2 Analyse the
dynamic social role of
education

functionalism

A theoretical perspective in
sociology that sees society as if
it were an organic entity, made
from many interacting parts,
which seeks balance and
coherence. Social change to
these interacting parts is seen
as coming about in order to
achieve this balance and,
ultimately, social cohesion.

meritocracy

Asocial system in which those
with particular attributes (for
example, intelligence) are
rewarded for this. Those
without such attributes are seen
as low achievers, take a less
prestigious role and are less
well rewarded. A meritocracy is
based on the notion that
individuals are equally able to
achieve in such a fair and
equitable system. Social
structures such as class, race,
sex and ethnicity are not seen
as disadvantaging an individual
in such a system.

objective

The opposite of subjective;
commonly used as an adjective
to describe a person, or data,
devoid of any influence or bias.
In particular, objective is a term
that obviates, or obscures, the
involvement of people in the
design or perception of a
particular phenomenon.

vocational skill

Askill that is useful in the
workplace, and therefore one
that should be developed
within the education system
because it increases

the likelihood of employment.
The economy’s requirements
for different skills alter
continuously, so that a skill can
cease being vocational and
others can become vocational.

i WHAT DOES EDUCATION DO TO YOU?

There is broad agreement among sociologists that education plays an important
role in the production and maintenance of social values, but there is less consensus
about the role education could play in producing new social values. It is often the
case, for example, that ‘education’ is cited as both the cause of social problems as
well as the solution to them. When the issues of bullying, sexting or gambling are
raised, it is invariably argued that bullies, sexters or gamblers require ‘education’.
When binge drinking among teenagers is discussed as a problem, ‘education’ is
invariably seen as the answer. The suggestion here is that education can change the
way people think simply by their being exposed to its message. It is as if the top of
one’s head can be flipped open and new contents poured in that immediately
replace the old, now incorrect or outdated ones. Things are much more complicated
than this, of course. Let us now turn to some of the ways sociologists have
approached education, and what they have had to say about what it does to us, and
to society more generally.

Functionalist accounts of education, perhaps not surprisingly, focus on the role
played by compulsory education within the wider society. Functionalism assumes an
ostensibly value-free approach to the key questions relating to how and why educa-
tion operates the way it does. Interestingly, these accounts detail the social, rather
than the purely didactic, role of education. First, education is seen as a sorting house
for young people. In other words, there is a belief that if the education system operates
as a successful meritocracy, then those with talent and intelligence—no matter what
socioeconomic background they are from—will inevitably achieve more education-
ally than those without these attributes. Such notions are predicated on the idea that
Australia’s state education system is free and is used by all students aged between six
and (at least) 15 so that they are exposed to the same influences; whereas, in fact, there
is a huge divide in the education of the rich and the poor.

The corollary of the education system’s being seen as an objective sorting house is
that one of its roles is to develop the nation’s human capital resources in such a way
as to generate a workforce capable of meeting the needs of the economy. If the econ-
omy requires information technology specialists, for example, there is little point in
the education system’s teaching metalwork as a vocational skill. This assumes that
curricula in schools can be changed very quickly as the economy develops, and that
students are very responsive to such developments. In fact, there is often a time lag
between the ending of a vocation, or the creation of a new one, and the response of
the education system.

Economic considerations aside, the third significant role of education (according
to functionalism) is the development in children of a shared culture or set of common
values and this is an argument which is used also to promote tertiary education—a
more highly educated population leads to a community with greater democratic val-
ues, a higher quality civil society (Bradley et al. 2008). For young children, school is
normally the first place they will come into contact with social expectations outside

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 6 THE KNOWLEDGE GENERATION @®

HOW FREE SHOULD SCHOOLS BE?

Although, as you've seen, it is compulsory for all Australian children to attend school until an

a =

age specified by their state, there are a diverse range of schools available with varying levels of
religious and other instruction, and public and private schools.
The state provides free education to all children from the age of five. Public schools are

regulated by policy generated by government, and their curriculum is shaped by the Australian

noecnnrn

Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA). All children have a right toa
government school place closest to their home. In 2013, 65.1 per cent of Australian children were
enrolled in government schools (ABS 2014).

Overall, Australia is committed to two broad national educational goals which have

determined the national curriculum. These are:

Goal1 Australian schooling promotes equity and excellence.

Goal 2 All young Australians become successful learners, confident and creative individuals and
active and informed citizens (see MCEECDYA 2008).

In order to reach these goals, there is a national curriculum which all schools—public and
private—are expected to provide.
Yet there are numbers of private (often called ‘independent’) schools that offer a range of

diverse programs fulfilling religious and/or philosophical perspectives. Some examples of such

schools are:
Faith-based Philosophy-based
Lutheran Independent community schools
Catholic Home schooling
Quaker Steiner
Islamic Montessori
Seventh Day Adventist Variety of others based on the philosophy of particular
llewish individuals (see <www.preshil.vic.edu.au> and
<http://erasmus.vic.edu.au> for examples)

Another model is the ‘charter’ school. These schools, which have been established in the United
States, New Zealand, and in England and Wales, are fully government funded in terms of their
buildings and equipment, must meet minimum education standards set down by the state, yet
their governance and operation is left to a consortium (or group) and the community the school
serves. In other words, these schools have a high degree of independence about what—and
how—they teach. If charter schools become established in Australia, it would become possible for
the philosophy-based private schools mentioned above to receive more government funding. It
would also facilitate a much greater number of religious schools given they could draw on public

funds for their establishment.

Q: To what extent do you believe that all Australians should have similar educational
experiences at school? Is public education the great equaliser?
Q: Are schools currently the place where young Australians learn a shared set of demographic

values? Did you?

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


