® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO3 Analyse
contemporary
perspectives on
intimate relationships

(Baker et al. 2009: 149-50). The second (considered a much less serious marriage)
resembles our own, in that no fault is ascribed to either party (an irretrievable
breakdown of the marriage is the grounds for divorce) and the couple need to
have lived apart for only 180 days for this to occur. Interestingly, those marrying
in Louisiana are overwhelmingly choosing the less serious marriage contract
(Monkerud 2006).

These conflicting social pressures, public conversations and relationship choices
must be seen in the context of a society that has come to have a culture of separa-
tion, where couples behave within relationships as if they anticipate it ending—
either consciously or unconsciously. This can account for two features of modern
family life (Mac an Ghaill & Haywood 2007). First, married women are working
more because investment in their careers is a hedge against the financial hardship
they might otherwise endure if they were to separate. This position assumes, of
course, that women find no intrinsic value in work itself, which is unlikely. Second,
it explains why men have not increased their contribution to unpaid domestic
labour and child-rearing duties: as they follow the demand to be flexible, commit-
ted workers, their time is increasingly absorbed into the workplace. Again, this
ignores the ideology of traditional hegemonic masculinity (also a feature of modern
life), which promotes men’s focus on the public rather than the private world. In
any case, prenuptial agreements (contracts which determine the division of assets
after a couple separates or divorces) became binding by law in 2000 in Australia—
an indication, perhaps, that couples are establishing a hedge against future loss
before a marriage has even begun.

‘Pure relationships’

Anthony Giddens has termed this style of relationship a ‘pure relationship’ (1992: 89).
As the social and economic bonds which in the past gave structure and meaning
to people’s intimate relationships have become increasingly less important, they
have been replaced by unions that exist purely for their own sake, to make each
partner happy:

It refers to a situation where a social relationship is entered into for its own sake, for
what can be derived by each person from a sustained association with another; and
which is continued only in so far as it is thought by both parties to deliver enough
satisfactions for each individual to stay within it. (Giddens 1992: 58)

When this is no longer the case, the rationale for the relationship disappears
and so does the relationship itself. Whereas in the past it was thought that roman-
tic love and marriage were lifelong states which couples made sacrifices to main-
tain, today the notion of freedom of choice has entered the picture: each is free to
stay or to go, given that the legal and social structures around relationships have
weakened. Romance can become a sought-after state of being, which can be lived

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES @®

over and over again with different people. Or as Steve, a 31-year-old health
worker, explains:

It’s nice to be in love and to share time with someone else and to be able to share an
experience and see it from two different people’s perspectives. Yes, I like being in love!
(Hughes 2005: 77)

Inherent in this analysis of modern relationships is a new understanding of what
the self, or the individual, is. According to Giddens, individuals see themselves as
neither fixed nor stable, but always in a process of change and adaptation to external
phenomena: ‘the self is seen as a reflexive project, for which the individual is respon-
sible . .. Outside events or institutions . . . only intrude in so far as they provide sup-
ports for self-development, throw up barriers to be overcome or are a source of
uncertainties to be faced’ (1992: 75-6). In other words, people see themselves as
constantly being made or developed, and as ultimately atomistic. In this context, as
social and community links become weaker, individuals see themselves as a work-
in-progress and the relationships they have as sources of learning about themselves.
One need only look at the shelves of self-help books, dealing with ways of re-creating
oneself, overcoming failed relationships or learning to love, to see that Giddens might
have had a point.

Two key streams of thought (and behaviour) have contributed to this emerging
perception of the role of emotion and the relationships which follow it. The first of
these came from feminist writers who questioned the discourses of romance and love,
and the role they played in attracting women to marriage:

Typically it has been argued that love itself, particularly in the form of romanticized
love in fiction and film, offers women both transcendence and power (over men), as
well as bringing happiness and fulfillment ... Heterosexual women turn themselves
into people of a kind they think men want, for the sake of love. Thus love is not
just economically or materially damaging, but damaging to the self. Underlying this
argument is an assumption that love of the heterosexual other is a kind of ‘false-
consciousness’, against which women should guard themselves because in the context
of manifest gender inequalities, heterosexual love can only reflect and re-create
unequal power relations. (Smart 2007: 61)

As we will see later in the chapter, there is an assumption here that love, romance
and relationships inevitably lead to co-residence and that in that context, gendered
roles are played out. While the latter may be likely, the former is becoming less
likely—people are increasingly choosing to live alone, whether they are in a relation-
ship or not.

Second, Anthony Giddens famously argued that the more fluid style of gay rela-
tionships paved the way for heterosexuals to follow insofar as, historically, gay men

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

and lesbian women were free from the role constraints which typified heterosexual
norms: ‘A general awareness that new models of love should be developed, and that
gay relationships provide a context in which this can be achieved is apparent’ (1992:
137). Since this was written, there has indeed been the development of new models of
love and new models of living, which we will explore next.

Mi THE WAY WE ARE

Postmodern living arrangements are diverse, fluid and unresolved, constantly chosen
and re chosen, and hetero relations are no longer as hegemonic as they once were.
We are experiencing the ‘queering of the family’ (Stacey 1996), as meanings of family
undergo radical change, and more and more kinship groups have to come to terms
with the diverse sexual practices and living arrangements chosen by their own family
members. There can be few contemporary families which do not include at least some
members who diverge from traditional, normative hetero relational practice, whether
as divorcees, unmarried mothers and fathers, lesbians, gay men or bisexuals. At the
level of individual experience, as hetero relations are decentred, friendship networks
become more important in people’s everyday lives, and the degree of significance
and emotional investment placed in romantic coupling comes to be reevaluated.
(Roseneil & Budgeon 2004: 141)

Living outside the gendered nuclear family

A key to the changes in the way people have lived over the past 50 years has been a
decreasing level of commitment to the institution of the nuclear family, and the tra-
ditional gendered roles associated with it. There has been an increase in de facto
relationships, in single-parent households, in divorce, in people living alone, in
remarriages. There has been a decrease in the numbers of people marrying, a declin-
ing birth rate and an ageing of the population.

One clear result of these changes is that we now live in a society where not living
in a nuclear family is mainstream—whether that means you live alone, in a blended
family, as a single parent, in a group household, or child-free with your de facto.
Indeed, it is more than likely that during your lifetime you will experience living in a
number of these contexts.

The rates of marriage are dropping in Australia—62 per cent of the population
were married in 1986 and just 53 per cent in 2010 (ABS 2012), whereas 11 per cent
of Australians aged over 18 years were living in a de facto relationship in 2010
(ABS 2012), and their numbers are growing. The figure for de facto relationships
includes same-sex couples who are (at the time of writing) unable to marry in
Australia. There are class differences in the marriage and divorce rates of men and
women in this key childbearing age; it is much more common for low-income peo-
ple without higher education to separate and divorce than it is for those with ter-
tiary education and higher income levels. This may well be because tertiary
educated people with higher incomes are choosing not to marry in the first place,

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES @®

but also because they are interested in cooperative, adaptive partnerships founded
on high levels of consumption made possible by their dual incomes, and these
(perhaps more modern) arrangements lend themselves to more long-term rela-
tionships (Birrell et al. 2005).

Post-divorce families

Families do not disintegrate when a marriage ends, but they change considerably.
Divorce affects not only the men and women involved but also their children, their
extended families and, ultimately, the wider society. Whereas prior to 1975 divorce
was an unusual and shameful anomaly, today it is very widely accepted and heralds a
rapid and profound transformation in the structure of families, in which members are
both acquired and lost, where children and financial support move between house-
holds, and where there are new and complicated changes wrought to the structure of
kinship relations.

Until 2006, there were three main patterns of care for children after separation
and divorce. The first was historically the least common, co-parenting. Here,
children move between two households—those of their mother and their father.
The parents have a shared commitment to the children, both emotionally and
financially and make the important decisions about their children’s care (where
the children will go to school, for example) equally. It is common in this arrange-
ment for the children to live with each parent half of the time. They might swap
houses halfway through the week and spend three to four days at each house, or
they might spend every other week at each house or every other fortnight. This is
the model for parenting preferred by the Family Court, because it can enable
children to have equal contact with both their parents, and encourages the par-
ents to cooperate closely in their children’s upbringing. This model, however,
assumes not only that the parents have equal incomes, so that they can share the
cost of raising their children equally, but also that their respective incomes are
relatively high, given that both must be in a position to establish and maintain a
family home.

The second parenting pattern is the most common in Australia, and that is where the
children live with one parent (overwhelmingly the mother) but see the non-residential
parent regularly, often for the weekend once a fortnight and for half the school holidays.
Again, in this scenario parenting decisions are shared using what the Family Court cur-
rently calls a shared parenting plan, which establishes the degree of contact the non-
residential parent will have and how decisions will be made.

The final model—solo parenting—is viewed as the least attractive by most of those
involved in these matters. This occurs when one parent (usually the father) ceases to
have contact with the children. Often this evolves by default when men gradually lose
contact with their children, but it can also be court ordered when there has been a
history, or threat, of violence.

Past patterns of caring for children from separated couples commonly led to the
fragmentation of a range of relationships—a child no longer had contact with both

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

parents on a day-to-day level, and connections with other relatives (such as grand-
parents, aunts, uncles and cousins) became more remote. For separated adults,
although they no longer had a conjugal relationship with each other, changes to
the law brought about stronger, ongoing parental continuity involving regular
contact and regular decisions being made together. The Child Support Agency, for
example, facilitates the payment of maintenance between residential and non-
residential parents when they are unwilling, or unable, to do this themselves. One
of the reasons for the establishment of this agency (aside from trying to limit the
economic damage done to children through separation) was to increase the amount
of contact fathers have with their children after separation, as men are more
inclined to see their children when they contribute financially to their upkeep
(Smyth & Weston 2005).

How people negotiate post-separation domestic matters depends, perhaps not
surprisingly, on the ways in which they dealt with issues before separation. Families
with a high degree of conflict prior to separation are likely to continue this pattern
of interaction afterwards, and those who had non-conflictive, constructive commu-
nication and negotiation skills follow this pattern in their post-divorce family
(Simpson 1998: 82). Similarly, a family’s living arrangements, the parenting roles
they play and their financial wellbeing don’t radically change. An evolving, previ-
ously nuclear family, where the woman undertook most of the child care and the
man financially supported the family but had less responsibility for looking after the
children, is more than likely to continue. Post-divorce, then, the woman typically
retains the family home with the children and the man moves away, seeing the chil-
dren every other weekend and for half the school holidays. The difference lies in
their respective access to financial and other resources: in the year immediately fol-
lowing the divorce, for example, women’s income declined while men’s stayed the
same. Women’s incomes do increase over time, but they are still significantly behind
women who have not divorced. Four years later, women’s income rises by just
2.9 per cent compared to pre-divorce levels, whereas non-divorced women’s income
increases by 12.3 per cent. Divorced men’s income increases by 12.5 per cent over
the same period (De Vaus et al. 2009).

There is no doubt that separation creates a number of stresses for all those
involved in it. For the immediate family, there is a reordering of loyalties and bonds,
and often the adjustment to having less contact with one parent. Added to this is the
common experience of moving house and changing schools. Parental conflict during
this time can reduce when one parent moves out, but it may worsen when the pro-
cess of dividing assets and making decisions about parenting comes into effect. The
reordering of relationships with the wider family changes too. A source of particular
stress can be the ongoing relationship the children have with the family of the non-
residential parent.

Overall, it seems that the post-divorce family, whatever shape it takes, enables
those within it to experience family relationships in new ways. A simple example of

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES @®

this is fathers’ perceptions of their relationship with their children. Many report a
much better quality of relationship post-separation. This might be a result of the
reduction in tension that typically follows separation, but it is also a result of fathers
forging new levels of communication with their children, which they have the oppor-
tunity to do when they have primary care (for however long a period of time)
(Hallman et al. 2007).
Research into the effects of family breakdown and reformation on children is com-
plex and controversial. Simpson argues that the ‘post-divorce family provides the
child with a significantly wider range of opportunities to have autonomous and indi-
vidualised social relations than the nuclear family’ (1998: 77). This might well be
because of the family’s continually changing structure of relationships, where mem-
bers’ loyalties adapt and change to a variety of new circumstances, including the addi-
tion of (often more than one set of) step-parents, step-siblings, step-grandparents,
and so on. Consequently, according to Simpson, whereas ‘the nuclear family spoke
with one voice (his master’s voice), the unclear family has a cacophony, a polyphony unclear family
of voices which are competing and contradictory’ (1998: 50). A family with fluid boundaries

whose members may or may
Not live in the same household

Adult children of divorce but who share children and

financial and other resources.
The children who experienced their parents’ separations after 1975 are now adults—

some with their own children—and in a position to reflect on their experiences of
their first family’s fragmentation, and the impact it had on their own development as
children, adolescents and adults (Hughes 2005). Their formative years arguably pre-
pared them for the more diverse living patterns we will see later in the chapter, but
certainly they have less trust in the nuclear family, as the following adult children of
divorce explain:

People are much better to separate if their relationship has fallen apart. I think it’s
much better for parents to separate if their differences are irreconcilable and if they
don’t have a decent relationship anymore. But I think parents should make an effort to
set up a set of circumstances that are easy on the child. Try to stay in a nearby suburb,
live close to each other in order to share the care. The kids being able to go to either
house, stay at one school and have both parents involved with the school. I think
those things [are important], but I think the key thing is to have solid relationships
in the child’s life. That’s more important than having two of them in the same house.
(Benjamin, 41, journalist/writer)

For me it was like there was no more of this fighting going on. That was the most
horrific thing as a child, you know, Mum and Dad going at it hammer and tongs and
having a younger brother and younger sister who I used to virtually take a certain
degree of responsibility for and protect them from it as much as I could. That’s why
the separation for me was sort of ... great[;] at least it’s put a stop to that! (Bert, 40,
social worker)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

I don’t know the stats but I think I’ve probably had less faith in the institution of
marriage or the longevity of relationships be it marriage or a long-term relationship.
I don’t really see them lasting. Now I don’t see anyone’s lasting and anyone’s working
and on the rare occasion I have a friend who has been married for 30 years, I do know
the odd person whose parents have been married for 50 years and I say “Wow how do
you do that? I want to know your secret’. I mean I won’t live long enough to do that
now anyway but I think it does cloud your perception because you think well, really,
what are the chances of it working anyway? My parents couldn’t work it out, their
parents couldn’t work it out, most people can’t work it out so, really, what are my
chances? (Alix, 34, administrative worker)

As the structural supports for long-term relationships—such as the economic
and social advantages of marriage—have dissipated, such relationships have come
to be assessed in contemporary societies in terms of their ability to be emotionally
satisfying. This is a dramatic change from the past when marriage itself was seen to
have inherent social value—and religious meaning—which was generally important
for social wellbeing. These beliefs, in fact, overrode individual needs so that the
meaning of marriage as a lifelong bond had greater significance than individual
happiness per se.

Today, conversely, people are much less likely to persist with unhappy marriages
because they believe that the purpose of marriage is to produce happiness, and with-
out that, the whole raison d’étre for the institution (or their personal one, at least!) has
gone (Amato et al. 2007). In place of the traditional faith in marriage and nuclear
families as meaningful and worthwhile, the adult children of divorce tend to argue
that families should, and will, become more fluid and be based not only on biological
relationships but on social relationships too:

Id like it to be more extended and people have relationships outside the nuclear family
that are significant and can help kids develop. For example, where maybe the nuclear
family does break down, kids still have other people to turn to for role models and
there’s an acceptance that really the nuclear family cannot supply everything that one
needs to grow because things are too complex, too hard. Id like to see a much more
wider acceptance of what family is or understanding and that’s not just Mum, Dad and
three kids[;] that it’s Aunts and Uncles and grandparents and friends’ kids and friends’
parents ... (Mary, 36, small business owner)

I think the family has already changed ... I think there will be a shift away from
the biological and away from the nuclear and perhaps even a move away from the
suburban nuclear family, to a more kind of organic view about family which is actually
more about roles of people who aren’t necessarily biological agents in a communal
or non communal context, in an extended family setting, I think we'll see more of
that. I think you'll find what people call ‘family’ basically represents the closeness of
relationship. (Trent, 30, community health worker)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES @®

Heteronormativity

The backdrop to the discussion that follows is the assertion that people have slowly lost
faith in the notion of a lifelong partnership, in a similar way to their loss of faith in the
nuclear family. Some writers (Budgeon 2008, for example) call the ideology of ‘couple
culture’ heteronormativity and argue that Western societies are disengaging with it in _ heteronormativity
practice while simultaneously retaining—and even promoting—it as an ideal relation- the demands expectations a ;
ship form. The vast majority of young people across all class, racial and ethnic groups _ limitations of heterosexuality
in Amato et al.’s 2007 study, for example, said that they wanted to get married, and this snd anythngeetobe
should not surprise us given the powerful heteronormative discourses that surround _ tansgessive. Living in such a
us. Heteronormativity relates to more than simply being heterosexual and acting het- ‘yrsvangyy boeudl
erosexually; it also refers to the ‘institutions, structures of understanding, and practical _ transgender and queer (L660)
orientations that make heterosexuality seem not only coherent—that is, organized as a communnsstomargnay.
sexuality—but also privileged’ (Berlant & Warner 2000: 312).

Marriage is a useful symbol, here, of such privilege since it bestows upon the married
not only (possibly) rings and (possibly) new names, but also a legitimised relationship
which is recognised by the state and a marker of prestige. It is precisely this legitimation
and prestige which same-sex couples have sought—with varying success—across the
world. In 2004, the Australian government took the pre-emptive step of amending the
Marriage Act to state that marriage is between a man and a woman (when it had previously
been neutral), thereby making a very clear declaration to the community that same-sex
marriages would not be contemplated and making the possibility of change appear even
more remote, despite the fact that this is discriminatory. Since that time, as is clear from

Table 8.1, marriage equality has become increasingly accepted as a human rights issue and

Countries that have legislated for same-sex marriage
COUNTRY YEAR SAME-SEX MARRIAGE LEGALISED
Netherlands 2000
Brazil 2003
Canada 2005
Spain 2005
South Africa 2006
New Zealand 2009
Norway 2009
Sweden 2009
Iceland 2010
Mexico 2010
Portugal 2010
Denmark 2012
France 2013
England and Wales 2013

TABLE 8.1

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

one which increasing numbers of countries are adopting. In this context, Australia
appears to be out of step with numbers of nations who we consider our close allies.

Putting the symbolism of marriage to one side, it nevertheless appears that hetero-
sexuality is—to some extent—reorganising itself and growing closer to the relationship
patterns of the gay community. Once again, the extent of this reorganisation depends on
age, class and ethnicity but overall, heterosexuals are tending away from marriage and
towards Giddens’ ‘pure relationship’, where people perceive themselves as evolving indi-
viduals and stay in relationships for as long as they are both productive and enjoyable.

Let us turn now to look at the ways of living which these changes of perception and
expectation are producing.

Living alone

In Munich, Frankfurt and Paris, over 50 per cent of households currently consist of
one person; in London and in Sweden the figure is 40 per cent. In Australia, the
number is lower, at 24 per cent in 2011, but this figure has grown from just 11 per
cent in 1961 (ABS 2012). It is estimated that the figure will double again by 2026,
when 54 per cent of all households will contain just one person (ABS 2006).

This is a dramatic change to the shape of households and one which is generated
by both demographic shifts, such as the numbers of the divorced, by people choosing
to live alone, but also by the growing numbers of the elderly. The housing stock in
European cities which is dominated by flats and apartments is particularly conducive
to solo living, while Australian cities tend to be dominated by houses with three bed-
rooms designed for the use of nuclear families. But this is changing, especially in the
state capitals, where medium-density housing is increasing.

Figure 8.3 shows the most common household type in contemporary Australia
as being families. However, we can see that almost a quarter of Australians, at any one

pe t))s3 <:35)) Most common household type

i Single-person households
i Family households

LJ Group households

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012) Australian Social Trends, Cat. No. 4102.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES @®

time, are living on their own. Partly this is because people are living for longer and
spending their final years living alone. (This is especially true of women, who both
live longer than men and live alone). Between 25 and 30 per cent of all those living
alone in 2026 are projected to be older Australians (aged over 75 years). But people
are also choosing to live outside families.

Demographers might tell us that this is due to the fact that fewer people are marry-
ing, and that relatively higher numbers are separating and divorcing, because this
information can be extracted from census data. But it is less easy for social research-
ers to track the numbers of de facto relationships which begin and end, or the move-
ment in and out of group households. Similarly, although demographers have
traditionally viewed the growth in numbers of people living alone as a response to a
relationship change (death or divorce, for example), it appears that people are choos-
ing to live alone for the long term, rather than as a stop-gap measure, whether they
are in a relationship or not. In doing so, they are mounting a challenge to the belief
that living on one’s own is second-best to living with someone else, and increasing
numbers of Australians are opting for this way of living because it enables them to
retain their assets and not merge them with someone else’s—an inevitability when a
couple live together.

As we have already seen, some lifestyles are accorded more status and privilege
than others in contemporary Australia—marriage being perhaps the most significant,
since it also currently signifies heterosexuality. In contrast to this, the state of being
divorced, separated or single once carried with it an aura of personal failure. But this
is changing since more people are choosing living alone (and being single) as their
first choice. In doing so, many contend that they enjoy the ability this provides them
to live exactly as they like, without having to negotiate with others:

Jill: Are there other things you could pick out that you enjoy or the things that you
find difficult?

Annie: Um, well, it’s silly little things really. I suppose like being able to decorate the
house exactly as you like[;] there’s no compromise in anything, you can do anything
you want. I mean people can moan and say that is stupid and say well there’s not a
lot I wanted, you know, whereas when I was married you are forever sort of ... toning
down what you like, or what you want. I know that’s a very selfish attitude but I do
enjoy being able to have exactly my own way. Bad things, I don’t think there’s anything
particularly bad about it[;] it’s hard to find any downside you know. (Reynolds &
Wetherell 2003: 499-500)

A proportion of those living alone are older Australians who have lost their partners
through death. Many of them are living independently for the first time, given that
they were part of the postwar generation who moved from their parental home only
when they married. (These were the parents of the 1950s and 1960s discussed earlier.)
For them, adapting to living alone is relatively difficult because both men and women

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 196 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

are forced to learn to undertake unknown domestic and social tasks which breach the
gender roles they have been familiar with.

Keith: I never realized the amount of work to keep a house going until afterwards ... It’s
amazing, just the towels. Surprising, the lint off the towels ... You clean the bathroom one
day and have a shower the next. And the lint off the towels, you have to dust again, you
know ... Or just a little lunch, you know. There’s a mess. You've got to wash the dishes
and stuff like that. It’s the planning that always gets me. (van den Hoonaard 2009: 748)

Similarly, women speak of learning to do things for the first time, such as to socialise
alone, drive a car, change light globes, attend to gutters, manage money, and deal with
people who provide house maintenance (van den Hoonaard 2009: 750).

Aside from men and women learning to manage these divergent daily tasks, there
can also be gender differences in their experiences of living on their own, with older
men experiencing greater loneliness than their female counterparts (van den
Hoonaard 2009). This can perhaps be accounted for by tracking back to the gender
roles of the 1960s, when women were responsible for household arrangements but
also for the social life which centred on the home—the organising of celebrations, the
provision of food and drink, remembering family members’ birthdays, and so forth.

Women, particularly from this older generation, have spent the majority of their lives
taking care of others. Living alone, once they have got used to it, gives them the chance
to ‘nurture’ themselves, to live the way they want to live. The widows’ descriptions
of their marriages indicated that their lives had conformed to the rhythms of care
required by their children and the preferences of their husbands... Once they got used
to living alone, widows often began to enjoy living according to their own rhythm.
(van den Hoonaard 2009: 749)

These experiences are also reflected in a growing section of the population who are
closely involved with someone but are choosing to live alone.

TO HAVE AND TO HOLD?
As we've seen, marriage patterns have changed a great deal in Australia over the past 50 years;
fewer people marry, most couples live together before they marry, almost half of marriages end
in divorce, only a minority of couples have a religious ceremony, only a minority of women take
their husband's surname and, finally, marriage appears to be much less about reproduction than
it used to be.

Similarly, there is an ongoing public conversation about the meaning of marriage which has

been partly generated by the inability of same-sex couples to get married in Australia despite
the fact that 65 per cent of the Australian population support marriage equality Johnson 2013).

The issues discussed through this heated debate include:

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e

necnon ae


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES t 196 )

™ The differences between marriage and a civil or registered partnership which provides
the same rights, benefits and responsibilities

® The need for children to be raised in households with male and female biological
parents

®@ The role of religion in a secular society

® Whether it is fair and reasonable to discriminate against particular sections of the
community

® Human rights

™ Whether same-sex couples should be empowered to enjoy the same status privileges as
opposite-sex couples.

The reasons for these issues being highlighted are complex but lead us to ask the question:

What is marriage for?
Q: Write a one-minute paper on your personal perspective on this debate.
Q: Where do you stand? Why?

Q: Turn to the person next to you, share your view and ask for theirs. Each speak for around

three minutes. Together build a joint view. Where do you stand?

Q: With your partner, join another pair and make a foursome. Each pair shares their view and

listens to the other pair's view. Together, build a standpoint for the four of you.

Q: Share your view with the rest of the class, outlining the arguments which led to your

conclusion.

Living apart together (LAT)

The number of people who retain their own homes while having an ongoing, intimate
relationship with someone they consider to be their partner is growing, with around
24 per cent of the population over 18 describing themselves as being in an intimate
ongoing relationship with someone they do not live with (Ermisch & Siedler 2009;
Duncan & Phillips 2010; Reimondos et al. 2009). A living apart together (LAT) rela-
tionship can be described as follows:

...a relationship, which is understood to include a sexual relationship, between partners
who have their own separate address. That is, they usually live at different addresses to
each other but they regard themselves as a couple and are recognized as such by others
... LAT is, in one respect, similar to co-residential cohabitation in so far as friends and
relatives know and accept the relationship. There is also the understanding that, as with
cohabitation, LAT is generally viewed as monogamous in nature and an arrangement
that is more than a temporary, fleeting or casual relationship. (Haskey 2005: 36)

In Scandinavia, governments have responded to these changes in people’s behaviour
by officially recognising LAT relationships for taxation purposes and define them as

LO4 Discuss new
family and relationship
formations

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 196) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

two people who have a committed, marriage-like relationship, but who are not married
and do not live together all the time. They might live together at weekends, or during
the week and not at weekends. In either case, it is their commitment to one another that
marks them as a couple, rather than their domestic arrangements (Trost 2003).

In itself, this introduces the idea that intimacy and proximity are no longer as
linked as was once thought and, for the most part, LATs fall into two broad catego-
ries: those who would like to cohabit but who have other priorities; and those who are
content not to live together and happy to remain as LATs. Let us look at each in turn.

The first group are commonly looking after children, caring for elderly parents
(Levin 2004) or young people living with their parents. They tend to view their rela-
tionship as a pleasurable addition to those they already have and do not intend to
disrupt their household dynamics by introducing another adult who would disrupt
existing relationships and introduce new loyalties (Levin 2004: 230). Perhaps not sur-
prisingly, this is common among parents, particularly when both parties care for
children and they do not want to create a new step-family. Rather, they view the con-
tinuity of the household and the children’s stability as overriding their own relation-
ship needs. Similarly, adult children caring for older relatives make the same choice.
Younger couples living with their parents view their LAT status as a staging post en
route to eventually setting up a home together (Ermisch & Siedler 2009; Duncan &
Phillips 2010).

The second group are those who live apart because they work or study in separate
places or simply prefer to LAT. Again, this lifestyle illustrates the decreasing centrality
of the cohabiting couple relationship which used to be thought of as a preeminent
social role. Here, people are choosing to prioritise their careers and their economic
independence above living with their partner:

He was very concerned about moving away from me. But I was at the end of my PhD
and I said to him, “Look, now is the time to move, because I am ... I’m not in a senior
position ...’ And for him moving to X University was a very big thing. I mean, everyone
wants to work at X University. And ... and he was quite worried. He was about to
turn it down, because he just didn’t want to go away. And you know, I just thought, if
you stop your career on account of your relationship, Pete, you will resent it, and the
relationship is going to go bad. (Teresa, 34) (Roseneil 2006: 10)

I probably would move in with her, but, I don’t want to because I’m a bit wary about
relationships. I think she is as well, because she’s had like bad relationships in the
past. So, there is all that love there and it’s from her as well. We have spoken about
it, and there’s enough love to actually probably move in together and cohabit but ’m
scared [ ... ] I am totally committed to her, but it'd be me moving in with her and
I’ve got my flat and I don’t—if something did happen you know Id just be starting
off from scratch again and so well that’s basically why I don’t live with her. (Tim, 26)
(Roseneil 2006: 14)

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES t 196 )

A significant proportion of LATs are older and retired. Many lived alone after los-
ing their partner through death or divorce, but after forming a new relationship,
choose to stay in their own homes. Just like their younger counterparts, they are not
willing to disturb other relationships (commonly with their children and grandchil-
dren) by introducing someone new into their domestic lives, nor are they willing to
give up their homes and surrender possessions for the sake of creating a new house-
hold, and nor are they interested in altering their wills. Many women in this age group
also report that they are reluctant to move in with their partners because they feel it
would involve them in re-creating gendered roles and gendered power relationships
which they are free from when remaining autonomous (Levin 2004).

The increased availability of email, mobile phones, SMS, synchronous messaging
and Skype has opened up a range of communication methods that enable partners to
be in contact frequently and cheaply. Many LAT couples use a range of these to talk
a number of times each day, and can use Skype, for example, for a face-to-face chat
over their evening meals in ways that offer a close similarity to being together in
person. Through these routines, LAT couples maintain their intimacy—if not their
proximity—and increasing numbers are viewing their arrangement as permanent.

Friendships LO5 Explore the
connections between
Against the dominant heteronormative emphasis on finding and keeping a life-long relationships and

conjugal partner, there was a widespread belief that such relationships are increasingly imeimacy

rare, and that a happier, more secure life is to be created by investing time and energy in
maintaining friendships. This disinvesting in potentially risky sexual/love relationships
and the prioritizing of friendships, which interviewees tended to regard as more stable
and reliable, is an important part of the relational context within which lives were lived
outside cohabiting relationships. (Roseneil 2006: 14)

As we have seen in the preceding sections, over the past 50 years people have moved
away from the nuclear family as an ideal and have embraced a range of ways in which
to live domestically, and ways to live emotionally. If this is a trajectory, then perhaps
it is unsurprising that the final section in this chapter explores people’s commitment
to their friends as a source of the intimacy, support, understanding and companion-
ship, as mentioned at the start of the chapter.

It has been suggested that the gay community has created innovative ways of cre-
ating support networks which blend family and friends, and that heterosexuals are
now following. The argument is that families have become less structured and more
fluid, with people joining and leaving them through divorce, and the customary roles
associated with family membership have become less adhered to. For gays and lesbi-
ans, family membership was often an alienating and complex experience given that
they did not follow the accepted conventional pattern of marriage and children, but
this generated the experimental pattern of establishing, instead, a ‘family of choice’
(Weeks et al. 2001).

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 190) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

A ‘family of choice’ consists of the network of friends, family, ex-lovers, even
ex-family members who offer the support, companionship and services which were
traditionally associated with kinship. In short, then, this is a kin-like group on whom
an individual can depend throughout their life, and to whom one is committed.

Dale is 49, a heterosexual man who describes himself as ‘single’ although he has a lover
whom he has been with for two-and-a-half years. He is now living in her flat, but they
are clear that they do not live together as she is working and has been living in another
part of the country for at least a year. Dale works part-time as a teacher and also runs
his own business as a mechanic. He has never been married but has previously been
in two long-term relationships and has three children with these two women. He
maintains close contact with these ex-partners as well as several of his other ex-lovers.
These partners constitute, along with his friends, his sister, who is a lesbian, her
partner and ex-partner, his children and several neighbours, what he calls his ‘kinship
network’. (Roseneil & Budgeon 2004: 145)

Other writers have attempted to create a typology that seeks to help us think more
systematically about the blurring, or suffusion, of family and friendships (Pahl &
Spencer 2004). Table 8.2 offers an example of the ways in which people might charac-
terise their close relationships, based on the following:

m@ people who they would help in times of crises such as illnesses or financial disaster,
and with whom they have had, and anticipate having, a long and secure relationship

m@ less committed relationships which can vary in closeness depending on proximity
and shared interests.

The relationships marked in Table 8.2 in bold are those which are extremely likely
to be in that quadrant but may belong in another, according to the individual.

It is important to recognise that every person has a unique cohort of friends and
family, some of whom are ‘given’ (family) and others ‘chosen’ (friends). It is unlikely,
for example, that anyone would draw their network from just one of the quadrants
above and most likely that all four will be used to varying degrees. Similarly, the
extent of commitment and closeness shared between each pair in this typology will
vary a great deal, but the key point is that there is no clear split between friends and
relatives in terms of the commitment to, support given and services exchanged. The
divisions between given and chosen relationships vary, also, among different cul-
tural groups—some have a much stronger emphasis on familial ties and responsi-
bilities than others. In the main, however, people are transforming the ways in which
they view their close relationships and beginning to rely on their family of choice
much more than in the past. This might be a result of the fragmentation of the con-
ventional family as people seek to replace the support of familial relationships with
the support of chosen relationships, but it is certain that the boundaries between the
two are shifting.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERSONAL LIVES t 196 )

Patterns of commitment

HIGH COMMITMENT

LOW COMMITMENT

Given relationships

Chosen relationships

Children

Parents

Siblings
Grandparents
Step-parents
Half-siblings
Family friends
Professional carers

(for the elderly or children)

Friends

Family members

Friends’ children

Friends’ family

Selected current and past neighbours
Ex-partners

Relatives of ex-partners

Cousins

Aunts and uncles
Nieces and nephews
Great aunts and uncles
Step-children
Step-siblings
Step-grandparents

Step-uncles and aunts

Work colleagues

Health professionals

(GPs, alternative medicine
practitioners, psychologists, etc.)

Children’s friends
Online friends via blogs/discussion
boards, etc.

Facebook friends

CONCLUSION

Source: Adapted from Pahl, R. & Spencer, L. (2004) ‘Personal Communities: Not Simply Families of “Fate” or
“Choice”, Current Sociology, 52(2), pp. 201-3. Reprinted by permission of Sage.

This chapter has touched on the ways in which people in contemporary Australia are changing how they live
their personal lives, and on some of the reasons for these changes. The norm of the nuclear family, with its
gendered patterns of labour and power, which so dominated the postwar years, has been modified.

It remains an ideal to which many aspire and still dominates a good deal of popular culture. Similarly,
advertising campaigns for small household products (such as washing detergent) and large items (such as
real estate or cars) use images of the nuclear family comprehensively. Although we might find them ideal
in theory, we find them less ideal in practice since they have been replaced by a norm which includes many

diverse family forms.

These changes, which have occurred over the past 50 years, have come about through both external
and, subsequently, internal pressures. The external pressures emerge from changes in the economy, and in
discourses about ‘the’ family. These led to shifts in social attitudes and, ultimately, to shifts in individuals
themselves. Men, women and children have changed their perceptions of and attitudes towards their lives and
the ways in which these lives interact with their wider communities. These are the internal pressures that have
led to the profound and radical transformation in the expression, content and meaning of familial and sexual
relationships that we are currently witnessing.

What of the future? We no longer live in a society in which it is assumed that people will have a partner,
marry or have children. As the number of children (in developed countries) declines, our families will shrink,
and it might well be that many of the roles traditionally associated with family members are taken up by

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e

(Continued)



SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

people's ‘family of choice’. Children are less likely to have brothers or sisters, aunts or uncles, or cousins. Given
the range of living possibilities now available, it remains to be asked whether—during the next 50 years,
perhaps—more of us will be living alone, rather than with another person.

Whether we do or not, we are likely to be members of a personal, loose, family-like group consisting of
both friends and relatives with whom we are closely connected, and on whom we rely for support and help of
various kinds. This pattern may contrast strikingly with the nuclear family norm of the postwar era, but is not
dissimilar to the ways people lived before this time when the membership of households was relatively fluid,
including members of extended families, elderly parents, lodgers and friends, in addition to the householder.
Within this context, we can see that the nuclear family norm might eventually be regarded as an unusual,
particularly 20th-century phenomenon and that people have reverted to a more multifarious, and ultimately
more satisfying, way of organising their personal lives.

CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

1.

How would you account for the development of the nuclear family, and why does it retain such
a powerful role in the public imagination, despite its apparent failures? (LO1)

Using the typology of ‘family of choice’ discussed on pages 200-1, map your own family of
choice. How accurate is the typology for you? (LO2)

How far should governments go when legislating private relationships? Is it reasonable, for
example, to pass laws which limit the individual’s right to live as they please, with whoever they
like? (LO3)

Is there a direct link between intimacy and sexual relationships? Is it possible for a person to
gain sufficient intimacy from platonic friendships alone? (LO4)

To what extent do you think it necessary that those in intimate relationships live together?
Could you imagine a context where you would, or could, make that decision (if you are not

doing so already)? Under which circumstances? (LO5)

Amato, P.R., Booth, A., Johnson, D.R. & Rogers, S.J. (2007) Alone Together: How Marriage in America is Changing,

Boston, Harvard University Press.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2006) Household and Family Projections, Australia, 2001 to 2006, Cat. No.

3236.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2008) Year Book Australia, Cat. No. 1301.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2011) Marriages and Divorces, Australia, Cat. No. 3310.0, Canberra, AGPS.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2012) Australian Social Trends, Cat. No. 4102.0, Canberra, AGPS.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2013) Marriages and Divorces, Australia, 2012, Cat. No. 3310.0, Canberra, AGPS.
Australian Senate (1945) Hansard, 185, p. 6455.

Baker, E.H., Sanchez, L.A., Nock, S.L. & Wright, J.D. (2009) ‘Covenant Marriage and the Sanctification of

Gendered Marital Roles’, Journal of Family Issues, 30, pp. 147-78.

Berlant, L. & Warner, M. (2000) ‘Sex in Public’, in L. Berlant (ed.), Intimacy, Chicago, University of Chicago Press,

pp. 311-30.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 8 PERS

Birrell, R., Rapson, V. & Hourigan, C. (2005) Men and Women Apart, Partnering in Australia, Melbourne, Australian
Family Association.

Budgeon, S. (2008) ‘Couple Culture and the Production of Singleness’, Sexualities, 11(3), pp. 301-25.

Cherlin, A. (2004) ‘The Deinstitutionalization of the American Marriage’, Journal of Marriage and Family, 66,
pp. 848-61.

Coontz, S. (2005) Marriage, a History: From Obedience to Intimacy or How Love Conquered Marriage, New York,
Viking.

De Vaus, D., Gray, M., Qu, L. & Stanton, D. (2009) ‘The Effect of Relationship Breakdown on Income and
Social Exclusion’, Paper presented to the Australian Social Policy Conference, An Inclusive Society?
Practicalities and Possibilities, Social Policy Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
8 July.

Duncan, S. & Phillips, M. (2010) ‘People Who Live Apart Together (LATs)—How Different Are They?’, The
Sociological Review, 58(1), pp. 112-34.

Ermisch, J. & Siedler, T. (2009) ‘Living Apart Together’, in M. Brynin & J. Ermisch (eds), Changing Relationships,
New York and London, Routledge.

Giddens, A. (1992) The Transformation of Intimacy, Cambridge, Polity.

Hallman, M., Dienhart, A. & Beaton, J. (2007) ‘A Qualitative Analysis of Fathers’ Experiences of Parental Time
after Separation and Divorce’, Fathering: A Journal of Theory, Research and Practice about Men as Fathers, 5(1),
pp. 4-24.

Haskey, J. (2005) ‘Living Arrangements in Contemporary Britain: Having a Partner Who Usually Lives Elsewhere
and Living Apart Together’, Population Trends, 122, pp. 35-45.

Hughes, K. (2005) ‘The Adult Children of Divorce: Pure Relationships and Family Values?’, Journal of Sociology,
41(1), pp. 69-86.

Johnson, C. (2013) ‘Gay Marriage Support Up but it Won't Change Poll’, The Australian, 24 August.

Laslett, P. (1972) Household and Family in Past Time, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Levin, |. (2004) ‘Living Apart Together: A New Family Form’, Current Sociology, 52(2), pp. 223-40.

Lindsay, J. & Maher, J. (2013) Consuming Families: Buying, Making, Producing Family Life in the 21st Century, New
York, Routledge.

Mac an Ghaill, M. & Haywood, C. (2007) Gender, Culture and Society: Contemporary Femininities and Masculinities,
Basingstoke, New York, Palgrave Macmillan.

Monkerud, D. (2006) ‘Covenant Marriage on the Rocks’, The Humanist, May-June, pp. 39-40.

Nock, S.L., Sanchez, L.A. & Wright, J.D. (2008) Covenant Marriage: The Movement to Reclaim Tradition in America,
Newark, NJ, Rutgers University Press.

m

Pahl, R. & Spencer, L. (2004) ‘Personal Communities: Not Simply Families of “Fate” or “Choice”, Current
Sociology, 52(2), pp. 199-221.

Reimondos, A., Evans, A. & Gray, E. (2009) ‘Living-Apart-Together (LAT) Relationships in Australia: An Overview’,
Paper delivered to the Australian Sociological Association Conference, The Future of Sociology, Australian
National University, Canberra, 1-4 December.

Reynolds, J. & Wetherell, M. (2003) ‘The Discursive Climate of Singleness: The Consequences for Women’s
Negotiation of a Single Identity’, Feminism and Psychology, 13(4), pp. 489-510.

Roseneil, S. (2006) ‘On Not Living with a Partner: Unpicking Coupledom and Cohabitation’, Sociological
Research Online, 11(3), <http://socresonline.org.uk/1 1/3/roseneil.html>.

Roseneil, S. & Budgeon, S. (2004) ‘Cultures of Intimacy and Care Beyond “the Family”: Personal Life and Social
Change in the Early 21st Century’, Current Sociology, 52(2), pp. 135-59.

Simpson, B. (1998) Changing Families: An Ethnographic Approach to Divorce and Separation, Oxford, Berg
Publishing.

Smart, C. (2007) Personal Life: New Directions in Sociological Thinking, Cambridge, Polity.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Smyth, B. & Weston, R. (2005) A Snapshot of Contemporary Attitudes to Child Support, Research Report No. 13,
Melbourne, Australian Institute of Family Studies.

Stacey, J. (1996) In the Name of the Family: Rethinking Family Values in the Postmodern Age, Boston, Beacon Press.

Sullivan, O. (2006) Changing Gender Relations, Changing Families: Tracing the Pace of Change over Time, Oxford,
Rowman Littlefield.

Trost, J. (2003) ‘Marriage, Cohabitation and LAT Relationships’, INTAMS Review, 9, pp. 95-7.

Van den Hoonaard, D.K. (2009) ‘Experiences of Living Alone: Widows’ and Widowers’ Perspectives’, Housing
Studies, 24(6), pp. 737-53.

Weeks, J., Heaphy, B. & Donovan, C. (2001) Same Sex Intimacies: Families of Choice and Other Life Experiments,
London, Routledge.

Wyatt, D. & Hughes, K. (2009) ‘When Discourse Defies Belief: Anti-Abortionists in Contemporary Australia’,
Journal of Sociology, 45, pp. 235-53.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9

DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE?

TER OUTLINE

—™ This chapter examines deviance from a sociological perspective; it views deviance as a
social construction.

® The chapter begins by critically examining the meaning of the terms ‘deviance’ and
‘difference’ in the context of the social and cultural diversity that is characteristic of
advanced modernity.

®@ Adiscussion of sociological approaches is organised around central themes in the sociology
of deviance: deviance and social order; deviance and culture; deviance and identity;
deviance and power; deviance and social control; and deviance and difference.

® Patterns of crime and deviance in Australia are then explored through an examination of

empirical research that focuses on the significance of class, gender, age and race/ethnicity
in ‘deviant’ behaviour.

learning outcomes

By the end of this chapter you will be able to:
LO1 Discuss the social construction of deviance

LO2 Compare and contrast different theoretical
explanations of deviance

LO3 Distinguish between deviance and difference

LO4 Analyse the social patterning of crime—the
effects of class, age, gender, race/ethnicity

Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO1 Discuss the | WHAT IS DEVIANCE?

social construction of
deviance In 1963 the sociologist Howard Becker wrote a very important book on deviance called

Outsiders. In a chapter called “Culture of a Deviant Group’, he explored the lives of ‘jazz’ or
dance musicians based on research he conducted in 1948 and 1949 using a method
known as participant observation. (For further discussion of sociolog-
ical research methods download Chapter 17 at <www.pearson.com.
au/9781486003310>.) Becker showed that the jazz musicians in his
study viewed themselves as people with a special gift that made them
different from non-musicians, or ‘squares’. They therefore believed that
their behaviours did not have to conform to those of non-musicians—
that they were not subject to the same rules or the same mechanisms of
social control (1963: 89-91). Becker saw these musicians as deviants
experiencing problems in dealing with outsiders (‘squares’) who did
not understand the way of life of the deviant group and who therefore
viewed their deviant activities differently (1963: 83).
Look at the photograph opposite.

m@ Would you describe the person in it as ‘deviant’? If so, what leads
you to this conclusion?
m™ Would you describe the person in it as ‘different, but not ‘deviant’?
If so, what do you mean by ‘different’? Different from what or
© Photographerlondon/Dreamstime from whom? What makes them ‘different; but not ‘deviant’?
m@ Would you describe the person in it as ‘normal’? If so, what do you mean by ‘normal’?
@ Do you think you would interpret the photograph differently if (a) you were living
50 years ago, or if you were a generation older than you are, or (b) you were not
Australian? Why would (or wouldn't) these factors make a difference?

These questions, and your answers to them, are central to current debates in the
sociology of deviance. They raise the important question: “What is deviance?’ They
also indicate the difficulties associated with determining what should be the focus of
a ‘sociology of deviance’. The topic ‘deviance’ always attracts large numbers of stu-
dents to courses in sociology, in part because they expect to be exploring the ‘strange’
behaviours of other people. The term ‘deviance’ covers all those who are experienced
as ‘Other’. This gives them a strange appeal. Our curiosity is triggered. We want to
know why they behave the way they do, and we expect a course in the ‘sociology of
deviance’ to be the opportunity for us to find out about them.

What students discover, however, is that the ‘sociology of deviance’ is a course about
us, not them! The sociology of deviance actually explores the ways in which we define
some behaviours as deviant and others as conformist. At the same time, it critically
examines who is doing the defining in any society—that is to say, who is the ‘we’ in the
statement above. It further questions why, given those definitions, some people come
to be defined as deviant, and what consequences this has for them (Downes 1999: 233).

There is an important set of assumptions underlying this view of deviance.
One of these assumptions is that there is some consensus in society about what is

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? t 196 )

considered ‘normal’ behaviour and what is considered ‘deviant’ behaviour. Second,
this view tends to go hand in hand with an assumption about the nature of
socialisation. ‘Normal’ socialisation is viewed as a relatively unproblematic process
through which individuals learn and internalise the norms and values of ‘society’.
From this perspective, then, conformity is ‘natural’ and ‘normal’; non-conformity
is abnormal.

What is ‘difference’ within this paradigm? Some more sophisticated analyses are
less wedded to ideas of value (and normative) consensus and suggest that deviance is
‘in the eye of the beholder’. The conceptual framework they adopt is that of a con-
tinuum, rather than a dichotomy. ‘Deviance’ and ‘conformity’ lie at either end of this
continuum, with ‘difference’ located somewhere in the middle. In other words,
‘difference’ is viewed as a form of non-conformity that is less extreme than ‘deviance’.
The problem with this approach is that it still assumes a consensus on what is
‘deviant’, ‘different’ or ‘conformist’; it simply argues that this consensus occurs at the
level of the social group, rather than the society as a whole. As a consequence, what is
defined as ‘deviant’ or ‘different’ will vary depending on which social group is doing
the defining.

Postmodernist and post-structuralist approaches offer an alternative paradigm.
They are much more critical of the concept of deviance itself, as well as of the perspec-
tives that are subsumed by the label ‘sociology of deviance’. They emphasise that
‘deviance’ is about boundary transactions and boundary maintenance. It is about
determining who is ‘us’ and who is ‘them’; it is about designating who is ‘Other’. This
perspective emphasises power relations in society and the political processes involved
in competing discourses, rather than focusing on behaviour per se. It also adopts a
very different model of society and understands the socialisation process as a much
more complex and contradictory set of processes than that represented in more
conservative perspectives.

Within this paradigm, society is understood as being constituted by a multiplicity
of social worlds (discourses) such that the boundaries between ‘us’ and ‘them’ are
never clear cut. Rather, the processes involved in constructing and maintaining
boundaries (and thus in maintaining social identities in a world of multiplicity)
have, as central to them, the process of defining who is ‘Other’. As there is never any
consensus on who is ‘Other’, these approaches refer to ‘difference’ rather than “devi-
ance’. The term ‘difference’ points to the political processes inherent in the con-
struction of ‘Otherness’ and the highly contingent, and ideological, nature of what
is termed ‘deviance’. From such a perspective, people are neither deviant nor
conformist. Their behaviour and their identities are viewed as much more fluid
and contingent. In short, these approaches take the view that behaviour can be
both conformist and non-conformist; individuals have multiple identities (both
conformist and non-conformist); and the construction of difference is a political
process involving ongoing negotiations over the boundaries between ‘us’ and ‘them’.
Such arguments have led Sumner (1994) to conclude that there is no longer a
sociology of deviance.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 196) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

It should be apparent from the above discussion that the broad field known as the
‘sociology of deviance’ encompasses divergent and often competing perspectives on
social behaviour. This chapter presents an overview of these perspectives and asks
you to take a critical position with respect to the ways in which ‘deviance’ and
‘difference’ have been constructed in Australian society.

Loz Compare Ml EXPLAINING DEVIANT BEHAVIOUR—THEORIES OF DEVIANCE

and contrast TS
different theoretical Just as ‘deviance’ varies according to time and place, so do explanations of deviant

explanations of behaviour vary according to time and place. They are sociohistorically contingent:
eviance
that is to say, they depend very much on the prevailing world-view or ideology, and
they reflect variations in predominant understandings of human nature and society.
Early non-sociological theories were followed by a plethora of sociological theories,
each focusing on a different set of social causes. In this section, we select a sample of
such theories to illustrate these trends and complexities.

Non-sociological theories of deviance

Non-sociological theories attempt to locate the ‘cause’ of deviance in the individual.
They look for motivations within the individual and ask: What kinds of people commit
deviant acts? (Roach Anleu 2006: 26). They include religious, biological and psycho-
logical approaches (see Roach Anleu 2006: 26-34; Hayes & Prenzler 2009).

Because they focus on deviance as a problem of the individual, these theories are
unable to account for the social patterning of different types of deviance. Furthermore,
they cannot explain any deviant behaviour that is rationally planned. Sociological
explanations, on the other hand, are particularly useful for examining types of devi-
ance that vary according to time and place.

Sociological theories of deviance

The sociology of deviance encompasses a range of theories that account for
non-conformity; however, there is little consensus on the causes of deviant behav-
iour. In fact, the sociology of deviance demonstrates very clearly the existence of
competing understandings and approaches to analysing social life that are charac-
teristic of sociology as a discipline (see Seidman 1997). Thus, various theories of
deviance ‘explain’ different aspects of deviant behaviour. However, they cannot
simply be combined to produce a more comprehensive account of deviance,
because these theories stem from different intellectual traditions with different
underlying assumptions about human nature (see Seidman 1997). In the follow-
ing section, we review a sample of sociological theories so that we can examine
some of their key concerns: social order, culture, identity, power, social control
and difference.

Fundamental to sociological explanations of deviance, however, is the recognition
that deviant behaviour (for example, crime and delinquency) exhibits certain regulari-
ties: as with all social behaviour, it is socially patterned. Sociologists take the view that
deviance is universal and that its ‘causes’ are social. Thus, they reject individualistic

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? t 196 )

explanations and focus their attention on social factors. A sociological perspective is
most clearly illustrated by Durkheim’s famous analysis of suicide.

Suicide—a sociological perspective

Emile Durkheim, one of the founding fathers of sociology (see Chapter 16), argued that
human behaviour is inherently social. In contrast to biological and psychological
‘explanations’ of suicide that pointed to individual motivations or reasons for commit-
ting suicide, Durkheim ([1897] 1970) argued that suicide is a social act. He analysed
suicide rates, showing that they vary in accordance with the level of social integration in
society. He distinguished three types of suicide: (i) egoistic, (ii) altruistic and (iii) anomic.
Egoistic suicide occurs when an individual is not integrated into a social collectiv-
ity, resulting in excessive individualism. Durkheim found higher rates of suicide
among Protestants than Catholics, men than women, and unmarried people than
married people. He argued that this could be explained by the fact that Catholics,
women and married people were likely to be embedded in a dense network of social
ties that integrated them into the social fabric.
Altruistic suicide occurs as a consequence of overintegration—in other words, where
the individual’s commitment to the social group is greater than any concern for personal
survival. Examples include Japanese kamikaze pilots during World War II, suicide bomb-
ers in the Middle East (Roach Anleu 2006: 38; Hassan 2008, 2010) and, more recently, the
terrorists involved in suicide attacks in New York, Bali, London and Mumbai, among
other places. These are people who are prepared to die for the benefit of the group as a
whole. (See Zevallos 2006 for a Durkheimian analysis of suicide terrorism.)
Finally, anomic suicide occurs when social norms lose their regulatory force
(Roach Anleu 2006: 38) under conditions of rapid social change. This condition is
known as anomie. It has been described as a state of ‘normlessness’, in which people anomie
are not clear about how to act and their social ties become severed. sntdeahes
According to Durkheim, then, variations in suicide rates between social groups condition ofsociety in which
within a society, and between different societies, are not a result of variations in dif- [re hs hen) beckttun ot
ferent types of individuals. Rather, they are a consequence of different levels of social governing social interaction.
integration. Durkheim’s concepts of egoistic and anomic suicide are useful for analys-
ing the very high rates of suicide among young people and among men between the
ages of 25 and 35 in Australia today.

lM DEVIANCE AND SOCIAL ORDER

The ‘problem of social order’ has been central to sociology since its early beginnings.

One of the major sociological contributions to the analysis of social order was the para-

dox that deviance is both pathological and may actually contribute to the integration of

society and, thus, the maintenance of social order. Deviant behaviour is pathological in

that it represents the violation of shared norms. At the same time, however, Durkheim norm

(1984) asserted that the existence of crime is universal, normal and functional aslong as *«ommon expectation and/

wae . . . . . . or prescription serving as a
it is maintained at a certain rate. Thus, any attempts to eradicate it are doomed to fail. guideline for social behaviour.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


@&® AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Following Durkheim, four functions of crime and deviance can be identified:

1. Deviance clarifies shared values and norms. Every society is a moral community.
Morality is sustained through the establishment of boundaries between
acceptable behaviour (conformity) and norm-breaking behaviour (deviance).
Thus, deviance and conformity are interdependent. Without deviance, there could
be no conformity.

2. Responding to deviance maintains the norms. The exercise of social control
allows people to celebrate their ‘normality’ by defining who is deviant and who
is not. Such actions further clarify, and serve to maintain, the boundaries of the
moral community.

3. Responding to deviance enhances social cohesion. Deviance makes people more
conscious of shared values and norms. Responding to deviance reinforces shared
standards of morality among members of a community. It thus enhances social
cohesion by uniting members in common indignation and anger against the
deviant. For example, a study by Hawdon et al. (2010) showed that solidarity
significantly increased among college students in the United States after mass
shootings had occurred on their campus and the level of solidarity remained
elevated for six months.

4, Deviance encourages social change. Deviant behaviour challenges the status quo. It
pushes the boundaries of the moral community, thereby suggesting alternative
ways of behaving.

Merton (1938, 1968) adopted Durkheim’s concept of anomie to develop his struc-
tural strain theory of deviance. Unlike Durkheim, for whom deviance prevents
anomie, Merton saw anomie as a cause of deviance (Hilbert 1989). In attempting to
explain the increase in crime under conditions of economic prosperity, Merton
argued that ‘some social structures exert a definite pressure upon certain persons in
the society to engage in nonconformist rather than conformist conduct’ (1938: 672).
For Merton, anomie, or structural strain, refers to the societal condition in which
there is a dysjunction between culturally defined goals and the legitimate, institution-
alised means for achieving them. For example, the culturally defined goal of material
success was shared by members of American society. However, there were structural
constraints on the achievement of the “American dream’ for those with limited oppor-
tunities for economic success. As a consequence, individuals might be under pressure
to ‘choose’ one of a range of illegitimate, or deviant, adaptive strategies. Merton’s
typology (see Table 9.1) identifies five types of adaptation:

1. Conformity is the most common adaptation. It occurs when culturally defined goals
(for example, material success) are achieved through legitimate, institutionalised
means (such as paid work). It thus contributes to the maintenance of social order.

2. Innovation occurs when the individual has internalised the culturally defined goals
but lacks access to the institutionalised means of achieving them. According to
Merton, this situation accounts for high crime rates among the working class.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? C211 )

3. Ritualism occurs when the individual follows the institutionalised means of
achieving culturally defined goals but has ‘lost sight’ of the goals. This is a situation
of ‘goal displacement’, in which the means have become the goal. The classic case
is that of the bureaucrat who has become ritualistically committed to following the
rules of the organisation as ends in themselves.

4, Retreatism involves the rejection of both the culturally prescribed goals and
the institutionalised means of achieving them. While it is uncommon, those
who adapt via this form of withdrawal are considered deviant by the major-
ity of societal members. They include alcoholics, drug addicts, psychotics
and vagabonds.

5. Rebellion occurs when individuals reject both the culturally prescribed goals and
the institutionalised norms but attempt to transform the social structure by
replacing them with ‘new’ goals and norms (Roach Anleu 2006: 49). Examples
include political revolutionaries and members of countercultures (Waters &
Crook 1993: 151).

Merton’s typology of modes of individual adaptation

MODES OF ADAPTATION CULTURE GOALS INSTITUTIONALISED MEANS
Conformity + +
Innovation + -
Ritualism = +
Retreatism = =
Rebellion oe Bs

+ Acceptance; — Rejection; + Rejection and substitution of alternative.

TABLE 9.1 Sources: Waters, M. & Crook, R. (1993) Sociology One, 3rd edn, Melbourne, Addison Wesley Longman Australia, p. 150;
y Data taken from Merton, R.K. (1968) Social Theory and Social Structure, 3rd edn, New York, Free Press, p. 194.

Merton’s theory has been extremely influential in the development of sociologi-
cal theories of deviance. It has been criticised, however, for its assumption that a
society necessarily has a single shared set of cultural values and norms, and for being
atomistic—in other words, analysing deviant adaptations as the responses of indi-
viduals. Subcultural theories of deviance developed in large part as a response to
these criticisms. They recognise the existence of more than one set of norms and
values (cultures) in modern society, and therefore explore the ways in which people
in similar structural locations develop shared cultural adaptations.

lM DEVIANCE AND CULTURE

Attempts to explain juvenile delinquency provided the impetus for an examination of

cultural norms and values that differed from the mainstream. Albert K. Cohen (1955)

emphasised the significance of structural inequality in the development of delinquent subculture
subcultures. His analysis of delinquent gangs explored the relationship between  4temotnormsandvalues

that is distinct from, but related
blocked opportunities to achieve culturally prescribed goals and the development of _ to,the dominant culture.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 211) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

status frustration
The subjective experience of
members of working-class
subcultures in capitalist society;
it accords with the idea that
deviant behaviour (especially
crime) among the working
classes arises out of blocked
opportunities for success ina
society characterised by
structured inequality.

differential
association

The theory that deviant
behaviour is learned through
association with those who
engage in deviant acts.

labelling

The process through which the
label ‘deviant’ is applied to rule-
breakers so that they are
treated differently; the effect is
a self-fulfilling prophecy, in
which the labelled take on the
characteristics of the label.

definition of the
situation

A phrase that emphasises the
importance of taking seriously
the subjective interpretations of
members of society because
these have objective
consequences.

alternative goals. Cohen was interested in explaining apparently irrational behaviour,
such as the destruction of property, by members of delinquent gangs. He argued that
working-class boys experience status frustration: that is to say, while they have inter-
nalised the goal of material success, they are unable to compete successfully with
middle-class boys in the achievement of this goal. A subculture with alternative goals
that can be achieved by working-class boys emerges as a response to this structural
situation. In this deviant or criminal subculture, non-conformity to wider societal
expectations may be rewarded. Thus, behaviour that appears to be irrational from the
point of view of the ‘mainstream’ may in fact be quite rational from the point of view
of gang members (Lawson & Heaton 1999: 60). Cloward and Ohlin (1961) supported
the concept of a delinquent subculture but emphasised that just as there is differential
access to the legitimate means of achieving goals, there is also differential access to the
illegitimate means.

Sutherland’s (1983) differential association theory shifted attention away from
the significance of cultural values and towards an emphasis on social ties and relation-
ships. His theory emphasised that deviant behaviour and conformist behaviour are
both learned in the same way. He argued that ‘individuals engage in crime when they
have been influenced by people with favourable attitudes towards criminality’
(Lawson & Heaton 1999: 54). Crime, then, is not confined to the working class. This
idea has been developed further by focusing on the process of differential identifica-
tion (Lawson & Heaton 1999: 54). It has been argued that the degree of identification
with another person is a crucial factor in the explanation of deviant behaviour.
Importantly, identification can take place with media figures as well as those with
whom one interacts more directly.

Subcultural theories emphasise the significance of learning cultural values and
norms in the explanation of deviance. They vary in terms of the degree to which they
agree that a consensus exists at the level of society in relation to norms and values.
Thus they also vary in terms of the extent to which they see deviance as a working-
class response to the frustration that arises from blocked opportunities for achieving
success. Nevertheless, one of the most important features of subcultural theory is
the recognition that behaviour that appears to be deviant from the perspective of
some people in society may be viewed as conformity by others. The cornerstone of the
interactionist perspective is this idea that the meaning of deviance is relative to time
and place.

Deviance and identity

Becker’s (1963) labelling theory adopts a symbolic interactionist perspective, which
draws heavily on Thomas’ (1928) theorem: ‘If situations are defined as real, they are
real in their consequences’. For Becker, deviance is a consequence of the definition
of the situation. Furthermore, whether or not a behaviour is deviant depends on its
consequences—specifically, how the audience reacts to it. He argues that deviance is
not created by rule-breakers with ‘deviant’ motivations; rather, it is created by rule-
makers who apply their rules to others:

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? C211 )

. social groups create deviance by making the rules whose infraction constitutes
deviance, and by applying those rules to particular people and labelling them as
outsiders. From this point of view, deviance is not a quality of the act the person
commits, but rather a consequence of the application by others of rules and sanctions
to an ‘offender’. The deviant is one to whom the label has successfully been applied;
deviant behavior is behavior that people so label. (Becker 1963: 9)

Labelling theory focuses on the consequences for self-identity of applying labels to
others. The successful application of a label confers a morally inferior status, a stigma
(Goffman 1968), on those rule-breakers who are defined as ‘outsiders’. Thus, labelling
theory makes an important distinction between rule-breakers and deviants. Deviance
does not automatically follow rule-breaking behaviour; rather, it depends on the
social audience’s enforcement of a rule (Roach Anleu 2006: 58).

Lemert (1951) further developed the distinction between rule-breakers and devi-
ants through his concepts of ‘primary’ and ‘secondary’ deviation. Primary deviation
is common: most people break rules at some time in their lives. Such deviation is
situational and easily rationalised. It therefore has no effect on the perception of that
person as a conforming member of society. A person becomes deviant, however,
when he or she takes on a deviant role or identity as a response to societal reactions
to his or her initial deviation. The labelling process can thus lead to a self-fulfilling
prophecy. In this way, primary deviation becomes secondary deviation: a deviant
identity is constituted and the individual embarks on a deviant career. This process
is illustrated in Figure 9.1.

Labelling theory begins to acknowledge the significance of power in the social
construction of deviance. One of the main criticisms of labelling theory, however, is
of its neglect of structured inequality as an element in the labelling process. The struc-
tural conditions within which labelling processes take place are the concern of other
theories that focus on power.

lM DEVIANCE AND POWER

Another set of approaches extends the insight of labelling theory to explore more
systematic questions associated with the exercise of political and economic power in
society (Lawson & Heaton 1999: 114). These approaches emphasise that the activities
of lower-class people are more likely to be defined as criminal than the activities of
higher classes, and they are more likely to be arrested, charged, convicted and sen-
tenced (Roach Anleu 2006: 61). Quinney (1970, 1977), for example, viewed working-
class crime as a survival strategy and as a rational response to class exploitation
(Lawson & Heaton 1999: 119). Similarly, Chambliss (1975) argued that criminal law
is a means by which the ruling classes defend their material interests (Lawson &
Heaton 1999: 122).

Cohen (1980) adopted a political economy perspective in his study of youth subcul-
tures in postwar Britain—the Teddy Boys, the Mods and the Rockers, the Skinheads
and the Punks. He saw the development of these youthful ‘styles’ as linked to the

stigma

Asocial attribute which is
discrediting for an individual
or group; it marks them as
‘not normal’.

self-fulfilling
prophecy

The idea that behaviour that is
expected of people may be
produced as a consequence of
that expectation.

deviant identity

The final stage of a deviant
career and the outcome of the
successful application of a
deviant label to a rule-breaker.

deviant career

The typical pathway followed by
those who are labelled as, and
come to define themselves as,
deviant. It involves a successful
process of stigmatisation, social
isolation, membership of

a deviant subculture and
construction of a deviant
identity.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


C211 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

eS 8) The criminal career

Criminal career Return to non-criminality
Primary deviance Not reported; observed
Reported to, or Not taken seriously;
observed by police not detected
Report taken seriously: Warning and release
detection/apprehension/
questioning
Station charge eee! Prosecutor decides

not to proceed
Court appearances .
PP Acquittal
Guilty plea;
guilty verdict |] Warning and release
Sentence
Fine; suspended Discharge

; sentence; probation
Prison work order
Prison experience Rehabilitation opportunities

Post-prison experience

Criminal culture

Secondary deviance

Recidivism

Source: Waters, M. & Crook, R. (1993) Sociology One, 3rd edn, Melbourne, Addison Wesley Longman Australia, p. 158.
Reproduced with permission of Pearson Australia.

contradictions of postwar capitalist development. More specifically, he saw them as
ways in which working-class youth could revolt culturally, if not politically, in the con-
text of a loss of community, a breakdown of class solidarity and a failure to gain access
to power (Downes 1999: 248).

‘Left realism’ criticises labelling theory for taking the side of the criminal and
neglecting the reality of the victims’ experiences. Proponents emphasise that the
working classes are disproportionately the victims of crime, especially street
crime, although they have the fewest resources to combat it (Lawson & Heaton

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? C211 )

1999: 147). They point to the marginalisation and relative deprivation (both eco- _ relative deprivation
nomic and political) experienced by the working classes as central to any explana- oipenencedepivatn when
tion of crime. In addition, they consider the importance of subcultural factors they compare their own
such as lack of employment opportunities and macho definitions of masculinity vesapemaaalald
in working-class areas in contributing to certain kinds of crime (Lawson & Heaton

1999: 150).

These approaches all emphasise the ways in which systems of social control are _ social control
implicated in deviance. They have moved away from the relativism characteristic of hechanims and techies
labelling theory, and view deviance as an absolute fact that follows from the realities that regulate the behaviour of
of the capitalist system (Waters & Crook 1993: 154). The concept of social controlhas °“"™*"™"*
been central to the sociology of deviance from its early beginnings. It has been

‘rediscovered’ as a key component of the workings of society via the contemporary
work of Michel Foucault (1979, 1981, 1988).

lM DEVIANCE AND SOCIAL CONTROL

Early approaches to deviance used the terms ‘social order’ and ‘social control’ simul-
taneously (Roach Anleu 1999: 46). The assumption in these approaches is that social
control is functional for the maintenance of social order and for the process of social
reproduction. Agencies of social control function to pressure people to conform, thus
minimising the disruptive effects of deviance.

Social control can be either internal (compliance) or external (coercion). By inter-
nalising norms into the personality, successful socialisation produces a social being
who controls his or her behaviour in such a way that it conforms to societal expecta-
tions. Thus, for Parsons (1951), deviance arises from inadequate socialisation.
‘External social control’ refers to any means of inducing conformity exercised by a
social organisation. Social control may be formal or informal. In other words, it may
be meted out formally by a specialised legal system and its associated organisations,
or it may be embedded in everyday social interactions (Roach Anleu 1999: 50). As we
shall see, the distinctions between compliance and coercion, and between formal and
informal mechanisms of social control, are central to more recent studies of social
control and regulation.

Hirschi’s (1969) control theory focuses on the social control exerted via social ties.
For Hirschi, individuals with social bonds to conventional society are more likely to
conform, while the absence of such bonds increases delinquency. In an empirical
study of delinquency, Sampson and Laub (1990) concluded that crime and deviance
are less likely among adults with ties to conventional society through employment
and marriage. They also showed that through the development of these bonds,
juvenile delinquents could be transformed into law-abiding adults.

The importance of social bonds in inducing conformity to the norms of conven-
tional society is a central feature of Braithwaite’s (1989) theory of reintegrative sham-
ing. Braithwaite identifies two types of shaming. Disintegrative shaming involves
labelling the offender as an ‘outsider’, thus excluding him or her from conventional

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


21: ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

society such that he or she is more likely to join a deviant subculture and reoffend.
Reintegrative shaming, on the other hand, involves demonstrating disapproval of the
offender’s behaviour, followed by encouraging the reabsorption of the offender into the
community as a ‘chastened deviant’ (Lawson & Heaton 1999: 98). Braithwaite argues
that where family ties are strong and individualism is low, shaming occurs without
ostracism and stigmatisation; it is thus reintegrative. The implication, however, is that
where communities are weak, shaming will tend to be disintegrative and contribute to
higher crime rates (Lawson & Heaton 1999: 89). This notion of reintegrative shaming
is fundamental to restorative justice programs that focus on mediation between the
offender and the victim.

The importance of internal mechanisms of social control is emphasised by
Gottfredson and Hirschi (1990) in their self-control theory. They argue that criminals
lack self-control (Lawson & Heaton 1999: 79) as a consequence of inadequate child-
rearing practices (Roach Anleu 2006: 52). The majority of the population does not
engage in criminal activity because they have been socialised in stable family situa-
tions where appropriate behaviour is clearly defined and where misconduct is pun-
ished (Lawson & Heaton 1999: 79-80). Importantly, this theory corresponds with the
concerns of the new right, who advocate that there should be better supervision of
teenagers and more support for two-parent families in order to increase levels of self-
control in society (Lawson & Heaton 1999: 80).

Critical social control theory

The approaches to social control discussed so far view social control mechanisms in
a positive light, seeing them as functional for maintaining social order. This idea
received strong criticism during the 1960s and 1970s. In the 1980s a critical social
control theory developed that was mainly concerned with processes of repression,
coercion and criminalisation. The focus shifted to how the state uses the law, espe-
cially the criminal law, to control the activities of those whose interests were contrary
to those in power (Roach Anleu 2006: 81).

According to Roach Anleu (2006: 81), these theorists developed three critical argu-
ments with respect to social control. First, they pointed to the fact that the activities
of the working classes were much more likely to be criminalised than those of higher
classes. Second, they noted the repressive effects of the criminal law, as indicated by
the fact that the prison population is predominantly drawn from marginalised seg-
ments of society—young, unemployed men, often from ethnic or racial minority
groups. Third, they pointed to the role of the state in maintaining the power and
domination of elite classes and thus the pattern of structured inequality consistent
with capitalist-social relations. Researchers adopting this critical perspective thus
focused on the social control functions of the systems of welfare, education, health
and mental health.

The recent work of Foucault and other post-structuralist writers has further
emphasised the regulatory consequences of social control. Unlike earlier critical

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? C211 )

approaches, however, post-structuralist analyses focus on the pervasive social control
that arises from the existence of hierarchies of knowledge and power in society. They
thus examine the repressive nature of power and social control in both public and
private settings.

Post-structuralist approaches to social control

Foucault (1979) explores social control in the context of the relationship between
power and knowledge (or discourses). He rejects the idea that power and control are
located in the state or in the ruling class.

For Foucault, power is located in the everyday practices of social life (Lawson &
Heaton 1999: 130). Within this framework, he argues that there has been a funda-
mental shift in systems of social control, from ‘punishment’ (prevalent in the 19th
century) to ‘discipline’ (emerging in the 19th century along with the rise of capital-
ism) (Foucault 1979). This shift from punishment to discipline does not indicate a
greater humanitarianism as societies became more ‘civilised’. Rather, it indicates an
increase in the pervasive effects of social control, at the same time as they become
more subtle and less visible.

Foucault notes that prior to the 19th century deviance was controlled through
the administering of physical punishment. This was epitomised in torture as a
public spectacle (for example, flogging, hanging, stoning, dismemberment, immo-
lation and amputation such as beheading), which clearly indicated the power of
the monarch and his or her right to obtain vengeance. In such circumstances there
is no ambiguity with respect to who is exerting social control and who is subject
to it.

During the 19th century the emergence of reason, or rationality, as a central theme
of the Enlightenment altered the nature of punishment. Punishment became reason-
able and rational; it was guided by professional knowledge, and its focus was now on
discipline: “Discipline was achieved by supervising the behaviour of possible miscre-
ants (surveillance), by checking to make sure that behaviour was consistent with
dominant norms (inspection and examination), and by categorizing miscreants in
terms of their potential threat to the system (coding)’ (Waters & Crook 1993: 154-5).
In its early form, this involved the segregation and surveillance of ‘problematic popu-
lations’ by incarcerating them in enclosed institutions established on the periphery of
society. Thus, thieves were placed in prisons, lunatics in asylums, conscripts in bar-
racks, workers in factories, children in schools, the sick in hospitals, and so on. Such
disciplinary practices rendered these problematic populations subject to mechanisms
of social control.

Foucault argues, however, that these disciplinary practices have become more
diffuse in contemporary society. The power to punish has become fragmented and
difficult to identify. The contemporary agents of social control (for example, the
psychiatrist, the social worker, the teacher, the probation officer, the psychologist,
the doctor, the counsellor) are less visible and the mechanisms of social control are

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


21: ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

normalisation

The process by which social
control systems regulate
behaviour so that it accords
with dominant views of
the ‘normal’.

LO3 Distinguish
between deviance and
difference

difference

Describes the situation of
‘Otherness’; it refers to

the diversity apparent in

social life as emphasised by
postmodernists. An acceptance
of difference in society opens
up the space for marginal
groups to present their views as
legitimate and of equal value to
those of the dominant group.

more subtle. Thus, the exercise of power is improved by being transformed into subtle
coercion (Roach Anleu 2006: 85). In the disciplinary society, then, social control
processes are extremely pervasive and diffuse. At the same time they are difficult to
identify, which makes resistance problematic.

The pervasiveness of these social controls develops further with the growth of the
human sciences (disciplines such as psychology, psychiatry and medicine), which
leads to a preoccupation with ‘normalisation’. (See Chapter 7 for a discussion of one
important example of this, known as the ‘medicalisation thesis’.) Importantly,
Foucault recognises that these ‘normalising’ processes are not restricted to the man-
agement of ‘deviants’ but are relevant to the general regulation of populations and
sub-populations. In this regulatory society, social control is embedded in everyday
life. Self-surveillance and self-regulation are the ultimate goals. Social control in mod-
ern and postmodern societies becomes more and more subtle, and sophisticated
technology is used to carry out surveillance and control—for example, speed cameras
and video surveillance cameras in settings such as shops, banks, hotels and central
business districts. Contemporary society has thus been described as the ‘surveillance
society’ (Lyon 2001).

Foucauldian analysis has shifted the emphasis away from explanations of deviance
per se to the analysis of social control. Note that, as with earlier sociologists, the pro-
cesses leading to conformity are emphasised even in Foucault’s work—although he
opens up a limited space for discussions of agency and resistance. It is these notions
of agency and resistance, in the context of contemporary identity politics, that have
led to an interest in the social construction of ‘difference’ and a questioning of the
relevance of the concept of ‘deviance’.

Mi DEVIANCE AND DIFFERENCE

Recent sociological approaches have attempted to incorporate the complexities of
gender, race, ethnicity and sexuality in their analyses of contemporary social life.
These approaches focus on the conceptualisation of social difference in sociological
theories as well as in everyday life. Some are presented as theories of deviance
that attempt to take into account social categories that have been neglected in past
theories—in particular, women, and members of racial, ethnic and sexual minorities.
Others adopt a more critical stance with respect to theories of deviance and are
presented as alternatives to, rather than modifications of, theories of deviance.
Many of these approaches draw on insight from Foucault as well as post-colonial
theory, focusing on the processes of normalisation and constructions of ‘Otherness’
in contemporary social life. Others stress the importance of adopting a more global
perspective in the analysis of crime and deviance. In this section we briefly examine
some of these developments.

Feminist approaches offer two main critiques of sociological theories of
deviance. First, they emphasise the neglect of women and therefore question how
universally these theories can be applied (Heidensohn 2010; Miller 2010). They
further argue that theories of deviance marginalise the analysis of women, leading

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? C213 )

to the neglect of such topics as domestic violence, rape and sexual harassment
(Roach Anleu 2006: 67; Daly 2010). Second, feminist critiques emphasise that an
understanding of deviance should focus on an analysis of systems of social control
rather than deviant behaviour per se. They point to the implications of the ideo-
logical division between the public and private sphere, and women’s location
within the latter. This means that women are subject to the application of infor-
mal social controls (via male relatives such as fathers, husbands, brothers) rather
than the formal agents of social control (such as the police and the courts)
(Waters & Crook 1993: 155). This partly explains why women are neglected in
studies of crime and deviance, as well as why practices in the domestic sphere that
perpetuate the subordination of women (for example, rape and wife-bashing)
may not be considered ‘crimes’. One corollary of this is that deviant behaviour
exhibited by women is more likely to be interpreted as illness (for example,
hysteria, neurosis and depression) than as crime (Waters & Crook 1993: 156;
White & Habibis 2005). Following the logic of this argument even further, it has
been argued that gender norms make women deviant almost by definition. In
other words, maleness is the norm, so that to be female is to be deviant. As Roach
Anleu (2006: 69) explains: “Women do not have to engage in specific acts to be
labelled deviant; the gender system routinely devalues and subordinates them.’
Such an analysis accords with the theorising of feminists such as Simone de
Beauvoir (1973) and Judith Butler (1990), who emphasise the positioning of
women as ‘Other’.

Postmodernist feminists draw on the work of Foucault to explore the impact of
a wide range of social controls on women. In particular, they examine the regula-
tion and control of women’s bodies and sexualities in accordance with heterosex-
ual male perspectives of ‘normality’ (Roach Anleu 2006: 71). They demonstrate
that the regulation and designation of women as ‘abnormal’, ‘deviant’ and ‘Other’
occur in all systems of social control, both formal (for example, the criminal justice
and medical systems) and informal (for example, everyday life). This approach
sheds some light on eating disorders such as anorexia and bulimia (Marshall et al.
2007: 127-37).

‘Queer theory’ offers an alternative to theories of deviance. It problematises the
concept of ‘deviance’ itself. Fundamental to this approach is a deconstruction of
the taken-for-granted gender and sexual orders in Western societies (the ‘home’ of
most sociological theorising). It questions the ‘neat’ gender/sexual division
between male/masculinity and female/femininity (see Wearing 1996). By recog-
nising the existence of a wide range of gendered and sexualised behaviours
(including transgenders, bisexuality, asexuality), it argues that this binary distinc-
tion is an ideological construction that assumes heterosexuality as the norm. It
examines normalisation processes and techniques, as well as resistances to them,
in the area of sexuality. In doing so, however, it critically examines the ways in
which notions of ‘deviance’ have been constructed and taken for granted both
in everyday life and in sociological theorising (Seidman 1997). It thus raises

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 21: AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

LO4 Analyse the social
patterning of crime—
the effects of class,
age, gender and
race/ethnicity

important questions about the possibilities of incorporating social difference (as
difference, rather than deviance) in the fabric of social life in the future (for exam-
ple, see Lucal 1999).

lM CRIME AND DEVIANCE IN AUSTRALIA

Official statistics on crime and deviant activity are the product of a lengthy and com-
plex social process. At the very least, this should alert us to the need to reflect critically
on the statistical reporting of crime and deviant activity. As Adam Graycar, former
Director of the Australian Institute of Criminology, states:

When examining our statistics it must be remembered that not every crime is reported
to the police, not every crime that is reported is recorded, not every crime that is
recorded is investigated, not every crime that is investigated is cleared (‘solved’), not
every crime that is investigated yields a suspect, not every suspect is apprehended,
not every apprehended person is charged, not every charged person is brought before
the courts, not every person brought before the courts is convicted, and not every
convicted person is imprisoned. (2001: 5)

In support of this statement, Weatherburn (2004: 4) points out that informa-
tion about crime mainly comes from police data. However, we need to be mindful
of the fact that police crime reports are reliable for some offences but not for all.
Homicide, major property crimes and serious violent offences are well reflected
in police crime statistics. In addition, the 2011/12 crime victimisation survey
shows that 93 per cent of motor vehicle thefts and 78 per cent of home break-ins
were reported to police. However, only 52 per cent of robberies, 49 per cent
of physical assaults and 30 per cent of sexual assaults were reported to police
(ABS 2014).

It is important to keep these facts in mind as we examine the patterns that emerge
from an examination of a sample of crime statistics in Australia.

Crime

Official crime statistics tell us much about the types of people that come into contact
with the criminal justice system, and about police activities and recording practices.
Three important trends can be highlighted from an examination of these statistics.
First, while there appears to be a public concern with respect to violent crimes in
society, these actually constitute a very small proportion of the crimes recorded by
police. Most arrests and convictions relate to relatively minor offences, such as prop-
erty offences (for example, theft) and traffic violations (Roach Anleu 2006: 225).
Overall, property crime rates have declined since 1996 although the rate of theft
victimisation—other than motor vehicle theft (MVT) and unlawful entry with intent
(UEWI)—increased by 4 per cent between 2010 and 2011 (see Figure 9.2). Second, the
national prisoner census reveals that the total number of inmates in Australian pris-
ons grew by 31 per cent between 2002 and 2012 (ABS 2013: 9). Against this long-term

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? C211 )

meu NS 84) Victims of property crimes, 1996-2011

4000
—— MVT = Other theft
== YEWI
3000 +
2000 4 Se
_
SiO
Tae,
1000 4 Oe
0 T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T
GS oe Oo OO BY OS & © © ho CO 5S
OCC Or On Ney a O Lr OG Be Onn O oO amt O Onl On men me
PPP FESS SEES ESSE S S

(a) = rate per 100 000 population.

Source: Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) (2013a) Australian Crime: Facts and Figures 2012, Figure 4, p. 7, Canberra, AIC.
© 2012 Australian Institute of Criminology.

trend there was a 2 per cent decrease recorded between 2010 and 2011; however, the
total prisoner population increased again by 1 per cent between 2011 and 2012 (ABS
2013: 8) (see Figure 9.3).

Imprisonment for violent offences has also been growing steadily over the past
decade, with nearly half (47.1 per cent) the prison population in 2004 incarcer-
ated for violent offences (Roach Anleu 2006: 242). In 2012, in all Australian states
and territories (except South Australia), the most prevalent offence for prisoners
was acts intended to cause injury (ABS 2013: 29). The rate of community
corrections is almost double that of imprisonment (AIC 2013a: 118). However,
while the rate of imprisonment has been growing over the past decade, the
Australia-wide rate of community custody has been steadily falling (AIC 2005).
Third, the patterns that emerge in official statistics on crime demonstrate the

Pricure 9.3) Imprisonment rates, 2002-2012

- 175
+ 170
+ 165

Rate

+L 160
- 155

- 150
ee |e || | [nn nnn |
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

(a) = rate per 100 000 adult population.

Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2013) Prisoners in Australia, 2012, Cat. No. 4517.0, Canberra, AGPS.
© Commonwealth of Australia.

community
corrections

Avariety of non-custodial
programs that vary in the
extent and nature of
supervision, the conditions of
the order, and the restrictions
on a person's freedom of
Movement in the community.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 211) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

intersecting influence of class, gender, age, race and ethnicity. We briefly discuss
these patterns below.

Class: White-collar crime

The majority of the sociological theories we have discussed emphasise social
disorganisation, economic inequality, poverty and powerlessness as key factors in
explanations of crime and deviance. They do not account very well for illegal
activities carried out by the rich and powerful—business elites, professional people,
public and private corporations, and other organisations. The term ‘white-collar’
crime is used to cover such activities. It was first proposed by Edwin H. Sutherland,
who defined it as ‘a crime committed by a person of respectability and high social
status in the course of his [sic] occupation’ (1983: 7, cited in Roach Anleu 2006:
357). Its meaning has since been extended to include corporate crime (such as
insider trading, fraud and embezzlement), as well as illegal corporate (for example,
violation of taxation, discrimination or securities laws) and professional (for exam-
ple, negligence) behaviour. It now seems to refer to any abuse of power or violation
of trust (Roach Anleu 1999: 259). The Australian Institute of Criminology reports
that fraud is one of the most under-reported offences, with less than 50 per cent of
incidents reported to police or other authorities (AIC 2013a: 34). In recent years,
sociologists and criminologists have also given increased attention to crimes facili-
tated by the internet; for example, cybercrime (Choo 2011), identity theft
(Selvadurai et al. 2010; Roberts et al. 2013); scams (Bartels 2012) and music piracy
(Broucek et al. 2005).

It has been estimated (AIC 2013b) that crime costs Australians nearly $36 billion
per annum and that ‘the largest components of these costs are the result of white-
collar crime’ (Walker 1997: 6; see also Mayhew 2003; AIC 2013b). In Australia, it is
estimated that fraud costs at least $5.8 billion per year (Smith 2008) and an Australian
computer crime and security survey estimated that total losses to Australian
businesses due to computer security incidents were between $595 million and
$649 million (Richards 2009). There is a dearth of statistics, however, on white-collar
crime (Grabosky & Braithwaite 1987). This is partly a consequence of the processes
through which offences are handled. Sutherland (1983) argued that one of the main
differences between crimes committed by the upper and lower classes lies in the
procedures for dealing with offenders. While the criminal justice system is charged
with the responsibility for dealing with crimes typically committed by the working
class, the illegal activities of the upper classes are dealt with by administrative boards
or commissions, which typically impose sanctions such as warnings, orders to cease
and desist, and the loss of a licence rather than fines or prison sentences (Roach
Anleu 1999; 258).

Corporate and occupational ‘crimes’ are embedded in the system and are difficult
to prosecute. Governments have established special regulatory and enforcement
agencies with extensive powers of surveillance and coercion in an attempt to combat

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? C211 )

such illegal activity. However, Roach Anleu argues that ‘prospects for controlling
corporate law violations appear negligible because of the problems of detection, the
economic and political power of corporate organisations, the role of regulatory agen-
cies, and difficulties in separating unacceptable from normal business activities’
(2006: 378). This has led to suggestions that corporate deviance might be best control-
led using informal social control, such as stigma and shaming through negative
publicity (Roach Anleu 2006: 384), or through a mixture of punitive and persuasive
measures (Grabosky & Braithwaite 1987: 4).

Gender: Women and crime

Women comprise only a small proportion of the total Australian prison population—
7 per cent in 2012 (ABS 2013: 8). However, the number of women incarcerated in
Australian prisons has grown significantly in recent years. Between 1995 and 2002 the
number of female prisoners rose by 78 per cent, compared with a rise of 27 per cent
among male prisoners (White & Habibis 2005: 224). Between 2002 and 2012, the
number of female prisoners increased by 48 per cent compared with an increase of
29 per cent for male prisoners (ABS 2013).

There are a number of factors that contribute to the rising rate of female impris-
onment. These include a trend towards lengthier sentencing for women, a higher
proportion of women on remand, and an increase in the frequency of drug and prop-
erty offences (Roach Anleu 1999: 147; White & Habibis 2005: 211). Between 1995/96
and 2003/04, female offending rates increased for assault, motor vehicle theft and
unlawful entry with intent. The rate for assault rose by 33 per cent (compared with
4 per cent for men) (AIC 2006: 62). In 2002 the main offences for which female
offenders were imprisoned were drug offences and robbery (White & Habibis 2005:
211). However, in 2003/04 female offender rates were highest for other theft, fraud
and assault and lowest for sexual assault, robbery and homicide (AIC 2006: 62). In
2010, female offenders were most commonly proceeded against for theft (30 per
cent) followed by acts intended to cause injury (18 per cent) and public order
offences (15 per cent) (ABS 2011). In 2010, the most serious offence with the highest
proportion of sentenced female prisoners was illicit drugs (17 per cent) (ABS 2010).
Female offending decreased across all age groups and in all offence categories
between 2009/10 and 2010/11 (AIC 2013a: 71-2). The most noticeable decrease was
in fraud/deception with a decline of 19 per cent. The rate of theft declined by 8 per
cent but remained the category with the highest rate of female offending in 2010/11
(AIC 2013a: 72).

It is important to note that the categories of victim and offender become blurred
when we examine female prisoners. A high percentage of female prisoners have been
victims of violent crime, including incest and sexual abuse; many come from situa-
tions of homelessness; most are sole parents; and it is estimated that 80 per cent of
women in prison have a dependence on drugs (White & Habibis 2005: 223). It is not
surprising, then, to find that ‘prisoner education can be enormously significant in the

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


C213) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

moral panic

The overreaction of the mass
media and law enforcement
agencies to minor offences.

It typically leads to the
construction of ‘folk devils’,
which cause the public to react
and call for sanctions to be
placed on the alleged offenders.

lives of inmate women ... [with the] potential to promote rehabilitation and positive
post-release outcomes’ (Spark & Harris 2005: 157).

Age: Youth and crime

Between 2008/09 and 2010/11, the rate of juvenile offending has been consistently
higher than that of adult offending; however, the rate of juvenile offending decreased
by 6 per cent between 2009/10 and 2010/11 (AIC 2013a: 73). The issue of youth
offending has been the subject of public discussion in recent years (McAtamney &
Morgan 2009; Morgan & Louis 2009), and much media and police attention has been
given to the problem of youth ‘gangs’ (Windle 2008). The research conducted on
youth crime presents the following picture. First, very few young people commit seri-
ous crimes and violent offences; most young people who come into contact with the
juvenile justice system face stealing charges (Roach Anleu 2006: 250). However,
young people often offend in groups (Cunneen & White 2011; White & Habibis 2005)
and commit crimes, such as shoplifting, for which they are easily apprehended. In
recent years there has also been an increase in concern over the risk-taking activities
of young people—including high-risk drinking (Cook 2005)—that contributes to
young people’s involvement in the criminal justice system.

Second, research into youth ‘gangs’ in Australia has found that American-style
criminal gangs do not exist in Australia: they are myths constructed predominantly
by the media (White 2013, 1999; Perrone & White 2000). It appears that in Australia
the term ‘gang’ is often applied inappropriately to any group of young people on the
streets (White 2013, 2006; Perrone & White 2000; see Pe-Pua 1996). Since the early
1990s, we have also witnessed the racialisation of these so-called youth gangs in media
reports (White 2013; Windle 2008; Collins et al. 2000; Perrone & White 2000). It has
been argued (White 2013; Collins et al. 2000; Poynting et al. 2004) that the media
construct ‘folk devils’ and generate ‘moral panics’ regarding ethnic minority youth
(see Chapter 5).

Research into youth formations has found that over 90 per cent of members are
male and almost 50 per cent are between the ages of 15 and 18. While criminal activ-
ity did occur among some of these collectivities, unlike with American ‘gangs’ most
offences were minor—theft (including shoplifting), robbery, drug usage and sale
(typically of ‘soft drugs’ such as cannabis), and occasional violence (Perrone & White
2000: 3; White 2002, 2013). Importantly, these crimes were not planned and organ-
ised; rather, they tended to be spontaneous, opportunistic and committed in order to
supplement inadequate incomes (Perrone & White 2000: 3; White 2002, 2013).

There is a gendered dimension to youth crime (Cunneen & White 2011; White &
Habibis 2005). A study of the juvenile justice system in Queensland in 1998/99 found
that 79 per cent of juvenile offenders dealt with by the police were male (Ogilvie et al.
2000: 2). Little gender difference was found in the types and levels of offences being
committed by juveniles. However, this research did find that men were much more
likely than women to be charged with assault. Importantly, women were more likely

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? C211 )

than men to be cautioned (60 per cent versus 37 per cent), so that they were less likely
to progress through the juvenile justice system (Ogilvie et al. 2000). Recent interest
has focused on the rising rates of female delinquency since the 1960s. Research by
Carrington, for example, shows that ‘there has been significant growth in the propor-
tion of young women appearing before the NSW Children’s Courts for violent
offences’ (2006: 39). Importantly, she also emphasises that this increase is the out-
come of a complex process. Not surprisingly, then, a number of conflicting explana-
tions have been given for this change (Carrington 2013). These findings suggest the
importance of examining the impact of masculinity and femininity in crime, and the
need to acknowledge the centrality of gender relations in the nexus between youth,
ethnicity and crime.

Race and ethnicity: Indigenous people, immigrants and crime

Aboriginal people are over ten times more likely to appear before a magistrate’s
court than are other Australian-born defendants (Roach Anleu 1999: 145). They are
29 times more likely than non-Aboriginal people to be arrested (White & Habibis
2005: 259); and the rate of imprisonment among Australia’s Indigenous population
(Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders) is 15 times that of the non-Indigenous
population (ABS 2013: 8). White and Habibis note that this overrepresentation:

... occurs across the board, in every state, for almost every offence, and at every level
of the criminal justice system, whether it be arrests, court appearances, police custody,
juvenile detention centres, or prisons. (2005: 259)

There are two main explanations for this overrepresentation. One is that it reflects
the higher involvement in crime among the Indigenous population than the general
population. The other is that it is the outcome of racial discrimination both within the
criminal justice system and the wider society (Allison et al. 2013; White & Habibis
2005: 262). There is evidence to support both arguments (however, see Cunneen 2006
for a critical assessment of these two ‘explanations’). High rates of recidivism contrib- recidivism
ute to overrepresentation: in 2012, nearly 74 per cent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait snd punshmert offending
Islander prisoners had been in prison before compared with 48 per cent of non-
Indigenous prisoners (ABS 2013: 51); and alcohol and illicit drug use is a factor affect-
ing some sections of the Indigenous population (Putt & Delahunty 2006). Cunneen
(2001) provides a comprehensive account of the impact of two centuries of cultural
dislocation and discrimination (including in the criminal justice system) on crime in
the Indigenous population.

Most research in Australia and overseas has revealed that factors such as race,
ethnicity or country of origin are less important determinants of crime than the
social environment (Mukherjee 1999: 1). Thus, insofar as some ethnic groups
exhibit high rates of crime, this is because new immigrants have high rates
of socioeconomic disadvantage and may live in disorganised communities as a

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 226 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Rates of imprisonment by birthplace, 1997 (per 1000 population)
BIRTHPLACE RATES OF IMPRISONMENT
Australia 1.0
United Kingdom/Eire 0.6
New Zealand 1.6
Vietnam 2.7
Greece 0.5
Italy 0.6
Turkey 1.6
Lebanon 2.0

TABLE 9. 2 Source: Mukherjee, S. (1999) ‘Ethnicity and Crime’, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice, No. 117, Canberra,
Australian Institute of Criminology, p. 8. Reproduced with permission of the Australian Institute of Criminology.

consequence of the disruptive effects of migration and settlement. Nevertheless, in
an international study that included Australia, Canada and the United States,
Thomas (1993: 6, cited in Collins et al. 2000: 66) concluded that virtually every
empirical study of immigrant crime has found that immigrants are underrepre-
sented in the criminal population. Recent Australian studies support this conclusion
(Graycar 2001: 10), arguing that there is no clear-cut relationship between ethnic
minorities and criminality (Collins et al. 2000: 65; White & Habibis 2005: 234;
Windle 2008). Data on the country of birth of prisoners collected as part of the
national prison census show the importance of examining different birthplace cat-
egories, rather than speaking of ‘immigrants’ as though they constituted a homoge-
neous group. Table 9.2 shows that in 1997 immigrants born in Lebanon, Vietnam,
Turkey and New Zealand were overrepresented in prisons compared with the
Australian-born. However, those born in Greece and Italy were underrepresented
(Collins et al. 2000: 67). Nevertheless, caution is needed in interpreting these data
because prisoner statistics do not necessarily reflect the involvement of migrant
groups in crime (Mukherjee 1999: 5). In 2012, 80 per cent of all prisoners were
Australian-born, followed by those born in New Zealand (3 per cent), Vietnam
(3 per cent), and the United Kingdom and Ireland (2 per cent) (ABS 2013). In 2010,
prisoners born in Samoa had the highest imprisonment rate followed by those born
in Tonga (ABS 2010). However, in 2012, prisoners born in Nigeria had the highest
imprisonment rate followed by those born in Indonesia (ABS 2013).

Deviance is a social construction. On the one hand, it is apparent that what behav-
iours, and which people, are defined as deviant is relative to time and place. On the
other hand, social definitions of deviance, and the consequences of these definitions,
are patterned: deviant careers are classed, gendered, aged and racialised. Importantly,
these patterns are relatively consistent over time; they are relatively resistant to social
change. This is apparent from this chapter’s discussion of crime in Australia, and
indicates the significance of two related social processes in the construction of
deviance—power and social control.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DIFFERENCE? t 226 )

CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
On 12 November 2012, the then Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, announced a Royal Commission
into Institutional Reponses to Child Sexual Abuse. The decision to hold a Royal Commission
into child sexual abuse (CSA) was supported by the then leader of the Opposition, Tony
Abbott, and therefore received bipartisan support in Australia. The inquiry, led by Justice Peter

McClellan, began holding public meetings and private sessions throughout Australia (see <www.

nocnoen ae

childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au>) in January 2014.

Child sexual abuse is not a recent problem and it is not unique to Australia. Past research
indicates that ‘child abuse is a historical constant that occurs in all cultures and societies and at
any social level’ (Pereda et al. 2009). However, it has only recently been treated as a public issue
(Mills 1959/2000; see also Germov & Poole 2011). Pereda et al.’s (2009) meta-analysis of research
on the prevalence of CSA throughout the world concludes that:

Studies conducted internationally confirm that child sexual abuse is a much more widespread
problem than previously thought, with even the lowest prevalence rates including a large
number of victims that need to be taken into account. (2009: 328)

In another meta-analysis of international research on CSA, Stoltenborgh et al. (2011: 79) found
the lowest rates of CSA for girls and boys in Asia, the highest rates for girls in Australia, and the
highest rates for boys in Africa.

The recognition of CSA as a problem that needs to be addressed at a national level is a
relatively recent phenomenon. In 2000, the Law Commission of Canada produced a report,
Restoring Dignity: Responding to Child Abuse in Canadian Institutions, and in 2009, the Report
of the Commission to Inquire into Child Abuse was released in Ireland. Both reports made
recommendations to alleviate or otherwise address the effects of abuse on those who suffered.
The Royal Commission in Australia is also inquiring into ‘what institutions and governments should
do to address, or alleviate the impact of, past and future child sexual abuse and related matters in
institutional contexts’ (Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse 2013).

You can watch a presentation by Justice McClellan at the Australasian Conference on Child
Abuse and Neglect (ACCAN) in November 2013 on Criminology TV at: <www.youtube.com/
watch?v=uv48FJWIBFg&list=PLWFrQ_uUvpi0zuBiX-2g53eaM9DLNGHpO>.

Q: If CSA is a ‘historical constant’, why is that commissions of inquiry into CSA did not occur in

Canada, Ireland and Australia until the beginning of the 21st century? Use the theories of

deviance (e.g. labelling theory) to develop your answer.

Australian society consists of hierarchies of knowledge(s) and power. The knowl-
edges and voices of the powerful become institutionalised and taken for granted.
Systems of social control support and reaffirm processes of normalisation in every
sphere of social life. In this way pressure is brought to bear on the less powerful, those
located at the margins, to conform to the norms and values of the powerful, those
located at the centre. Most of the theories of deviance discussed in this chapter
acknowledge these processes. They vary, however, in the degree to which the norms
and values of the less powerful are viewed as legitimate.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

CONCLUSION

This chapter has explored the social construction of deviance in contemporary Australian society. Through

a critical examination of the terms ‘deviance’ and ‘difference’, you have been invited to consider the role of
power and ideology in determining what is defined as deviant behaviour, and who is subsequently labelled
as ‘deviant’. Attempts to explain ‘deviant’ behaviour have been central to the discipline of sociology since its
early beginnings. In this chapter the discussion of a number of approaches has highlighted the significance
of various social processes in explanations of deviant behaviour: social integration, social order, culture,
identity, power and social control. All of these need to be taken into account when examining empirical

data on crime and deviance, as these tend to describe the outcomes of a long and complex labelling process.
Conditions of postmodernity have led to the increased recognition of social and cultural diversity in society, in
part as a consequence of resistances to labels of ‘deviant’. This has forced a shift towards the use of the term
‘difference’ rather than ‘deviance’, such that some commentators argue that the ‘sociology of deviance’ is no
longer relevant to an analysis of contemporary social life. Other sociologists disagree: they see the ‘sociology of
deviance’ as continuing to be central to the discipline of sociology (Adler & Adler 2006).

e @eeee?e*eee?*e@e@e*e¢@e@*#* ¢6¢ee@e¢6 e¢@ ee @ @ @ @ @ @ 6 @ ¢@ @ ¢ @ @ @ @ @

J CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS

Is ‘deviance’ the opposite of ‘conformity’? Provide examples to illustrate your argument. (LO1)
2. In Australia, suicide rates are highest among young men, rural men, and men between the ages
of 25 and 35. Using understandings derived from Durkheim’s analysis of suicide as a starting
point, how would you account for the social patterning of suicide in Australian society? (LO1)
3. Discuss the positive and negative effects of deviance in society. (LO2)
aa ii 4. Is ‘consumerism’ a mechanism of social control? Use examples to justify your answer. (LO2)
a ( ) 5. Whatis meant by ‘recidivism’? Which theories of deviance best account for this phenomenon?
How could the incidence of recidivism be reduced? (LO2, LO4)
6. Listanumber of your own behaviours that could be considered ‘deviant’ anda number that could
| be considered ‘different’. Critically discuss how and why the terms ‘deviance’ and ‘difference’ are
-. used in these contexts. What are the similarities and differences in these behaviours? (LO3)
7 7. Howwould you explain the recent dramatic rise in women’s participation in the criminal justice
system (especially in relation to violent crimes)? (LO3, LO4)
8. To what extent do crime statistics describe the incidence of crime in society? Discuss the

implications of your answer for the development of criminal justice policy. (LO4)

PREFERENCES

Adler, P.A. & Adler, P. (2006) ‘The Deviance Society’, Deviant Behavior, 27(2), pp. 129-48.

Allison, F.J., Schwartz, M. & Cunneen, C. (2013) “That's Discrimination!” Indigenous Peoples’ Experiences of
Discrimination in the Northern Territory’, Indigenous Law Bulletin, 8(5), pp. 8-12.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2010) Prisoners in Australia, 2010, Cat. No. 4517.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2011) Recorded Crime—Offenders, 2009-10, Cat. No. 4519.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2013) Prisoners in Australia, 2012, Cat. No. 4517.0, Canberra, AGPS.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DI

Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) (2014) Crime Victimisation, Australia, 2012-2013, Cat. No. 4530.0, Canberra,
Commonwealth of Australia.

Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) (2005) ‘Community Corrections in Australia’, Crime Facts Info, No. 100,
Canberra, AIC.

Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) (2006) Australian Crime: Facts and Figures 2005, Canberra, AIC.

Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) (2013a) Australian Crime: Facts and Figures 2012, Canberra, AIC.

Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) (2013b) ‘Costs of Crime’, <http://www.aic.gov.au/crime_community/
communitycrime/costs.html>, accessed January 2014.

Bartels, L. (2012) ‘Sentencing Scammers: Law and practice’, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice,
No. 443, Canberra, Australian Institute of Criminology.

Becker, H.S. (1963) Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance, New York, The Free Press.

Braithwaite, J. (1989) Crime, Shame and Reintegration, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Broucek, V., Turner, P. & Frings, S. (2005) ‘Music Piracy, Universities and the Australian Federal Court: Issues for
Forensic Computing Specialists’, Computer Law and Security Report, 21, pp. 30-7.

Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity, New York, Routledge.

Carrington, K. (2006) ‘Does Feminism Spoil Girls? Explanations for Official Rises in Female Delinquency’, The
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology, 39(1), pp. 34-53.

Carrington, K. (2013) ‘Girls and Violence: The Case for a Feminist Theory of Female Violence’, International
Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy, 2(2), pp. 1-17.

Chambliss, W.J. (1975) ‘Towards a Political Economy of Crime’, Theory and Society, Vol. 2.

Choo, K.R. (2011) ‘Cyber Threat Landscape Faced by Financial and Insurance Industry’, Trends and Issues in
Crime and Criminal Justice, No. 408, Canberra, Australian Institute of Criminology.

Cloward, R.A. & Ohlin, L.E. (1961) Delinquency and Opportunity, Glencoe, IL, Free Press.

Cohen, A.K. (1955) Delinquent Boys: The Culture of the Gang, New York, The Free Press.

Cohen, S. (1980) Folk Devils and Moral Panics, 2nd edn, Oxford, Martin Robertson.

Collins, J., Noble, G., Poynting, S. & Tabar, P. (2000) Kebabs, Kids, Cops and Crime: Youth, Ethnicity and Crime,
Sydney, Pluto Press.

Cook, C. (2005) ‘Preventing Alcohol-related Harm among Australian Rural Youth: Investigating the “Social
Norms” Approach’, Briefing Paper No. 1, June 2005, Tasmanian Institute of Law Enforcement Studies,
University of Tasmania.

Cunneen, C. (2001) Conflict, Politics and Crime: Aboriginal Communities and the Police, Sydney, Allen & Unwin.

Cunneen, C. (2006) ‘Racism, Discrimination and the Over-representation of Indigenous People in the
Criminal Justice System: Some Conceptual and Explanatory Issues’, Current Issues in Criminal Justice,
17(3), pp. 329-46.

Cunneen, C. & White, R. (2011) Juvenile Justice: Youth and Crime in Australia, 4th edn, South Melbourne, Oxford
University Press.

Daly, K. (2010) ‘Feminist Perspectives in Criminology: A Review with Gen Y in Mind’, in E. McLaughlin &
T. Newburn (eds), The Handbook of Criminological Theory, London, Sage, pp. 225-46.

de Beauvoir, S. (1973) The Second Sex, trans. E.M. Parshley, New York, Vintage.

Downes, D. (1999) ‘Crime and Deviance’, in S. Taylor (ed.), Sociology: Issues and Debates, Houndmills, UK,
Macmillan, pp. 231-52.

Durkheim, E. ([1897] 1970) Suicide: A Study in Sociology, trans. J.A. Spaulding & G. Simpson, London, Routledge
and Kegan Paul.

Durkheim, E. (1984) The Division of Labour in Society, trans. W.D. Halls, London, Macmillan.

Foucault, M. (1979) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. A. Sheridan, New York, Vintage Books.

Foucault, M. (1981) The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, trans. R. Hurley, Harmondsworth, UK, Penguin.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


N SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

Foucault, M. (1988) Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, trans. R. Howard, New
York, Vintage Books.

Germov, J. & Poole, M. (2011) ‘The Sociological Gaze: Linking Private Lives to Public Issues’, in Public Sociology:
An Introduction to Australian Sociology, Sydney, Allen & Unwin, pp. 2-18.

Goffman, E. (1968) Stigma: Notes on the Management of a Spoiled Identity, Harmondsworth, UK, Penguin.

Gottfredson, M.R. & Hirschi, T. (1990) A General Theory of Crime, Stanford, CA, Stanford University Press.

Grabosky, P. & Braithwaite, J. (1987) ‘Corporate Crime in Australia’, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal
Justice, No. 5, Canberra, Australian Institute of Criminology.

Graycar, A. (2001) ‘Crime and Justice: Centenary Article—Crime in the Twentieth Century in Australia’, in
Australian Bureau of Statistics, Year Book Australia 2001, Canberra, AGPS.

Hassan, R.U. (2008) ‘Global Rise of Suicide Terrorism: An Overview’, Asian Journal of Social Science, 36(2), pp. 271-91.

Hassan, R.U. (2010) Life as a Weapon: The Global Rise of Suicide Bombings, London, Routledge.

Hawdon, J., Ryan, J. & Agnich, L. (2010) ‘Crime as a Source of Solidarity: A Research Note Testing Durkheim's
Assertion, Deviant Behavior, 31(8), pp. 679-703.

Hayes, H. & Prenzler, T. (eds) (2009) An Introduction to Crime and Criminology, 2nd edn, Sydney,
Pearson Education.

Heidensohn, F. (2010) ‘The Deviance of Women: A Critique and an Enquiry’, British Journal of Sociology, 60th
Anniversary Issue, pp. 111-26.

Hilbert, R.A. (1989) ‘Durkheim and Merton on Anomie: An Unexplored Contrast and its Derivatives’, Social
Problems, 26, pp. 242-50.

Hirschi, T. (1969) Causes of Delinquency, Berkeley, CA, University of California Press.

Lawson, T. & Heaton, T. (1999) Crime and Deviance, Houndmills, UK, Macmillan.

Lemert, E.M. (1951) Social Pathology, New York, McGraw-Hill.

Lucal, B. (1999) ‘What it Means To Be a Gendered Me: Life on the Boundaries of a Dichotomous Gender
System’, Gender and Society, 13(6), pp. 781-97.

Lyon, D. (2001) Surveillance Society: Monitoring Everyday Life, Buckingham, UK, Open University Press.

McAtamney, A. & Morgan, A. (2009) ‘Key Issues in Antisocial Behaviour’, Research in Practice, No. 05, Canberra,
Australian Institute of Criminology.

Mayhew, P. (2003) ‘Counting the Costs of Crime in Australia’, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice,
No. 247, Canberra, Australian Institute of Criminology.

Marshall, H., Douglas, K. & McDonnell, D. (2007) Deviance and Social Control: Who Rules?, South Melbourne,
Oxford University Press.

Merton, R.K. (1938) ‘Social Structure and Anomie’, American Sociological Review, 3, pp. 672-83.

Merton, R.K. (1968) Social Theory and Social Structure, 3rd edn, New York, Free Press.

Miller, J. (2010) ‘Commentary on Heidensohn’s “The Deviance of Women”: Continuity and Change over Four
Decades of Research on Gender, Crime and Social Control’, British Journal of Sociology, 60th Anniversary
Issue, pp. 133-9.

Mills, C.W. (1959/2000) The Sociological Imagination, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Morgan, A. & Louis, E. (2009) ‘Key Issues in Graffiti’, Research in Practice, No. 06, Canberra, Australian Institute

of Criminology.

Mukherjee, S. (1999) ‘Ethnicity and Crime’, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice, No. 117, Canberra,
Australian Institute of Criminology.

Ogilvie, E., Lynch, M. & Bell, S. (2000) ‘Gender and Official Statistics: The Juvenile Justice System in
Queensland, 1998-99’, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice, No. 162, Canberra, Australian Institute
of Criminology.

Parsons, T. (1951) The Social System, New York, The Free Press.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 9 DEVIANCE OR DI

Pe-Pua, R. (1996) ‘We’re Just Like Other Kids’: Street-frequenting Youth of Non-English-speaking Background,
Melbourne, Bureau of Immigration, Multicultural and Population Research.

Pereda, N., Guilera, G., Forns, M. & Gomez-Benito, J. (2009) ‘The Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse in Community
and Student Samples: A Meta-Analysis’, Clinical Psychology Review, 29, pp. 328-38.

Perrone, S. & White, R. (2000) ‘Young People and Gangs’, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice,
No. 167, Canberra, Australian Institute of Criminology.

Poynting, S., Noble, G., Tabar, P. & Collins, J. (2004) Bin Laden in the Suburbs: Criminalising the Arab Other,
Sydney, Institute of Criminology/Federation Press.

Putt, J. & Delahunty, B. (2006) ‘Illicit Drug Use in Rural and Remote Indigenous Communities’, Trends and Issues
in Crime and Criminal Justice, No. 322, Canberra, Australian Institute of Criminology.

Quinney, R. (1970) The Social Reality of Crime, Boston, Little, Blown and Company.

Quinney, R. (1977) Class, State and Crime: On the Theory and Practice of Criminal Justice, New York, Longman.

Richards, K. (2009) The Australian Business Assessment of Computer User Security: A National Survey, AIC Reports:
Research and Public Policy Series, No. 102, Canberra, Australian Institute of Criminology.

Roach Anleu, S.L. (1999) Deviance, Conformity and Control, 3rd edn, Melbourne, Addison Wesley Longman
Australia.

Roach Anleu, S.L. (2006) Deviance, Conformity and Control, 4th edn, Sydney, Pearson Education Australia.

Roberts, L., Indermaur, D. & Spiranovic, C. (2013) ‘Fear of Cyber-Identity Theft and Related Fraudulent Activity’,
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law, 20(3), pp. 315-28.

Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse (2013) Issues Papers Next Steps, <http://
www.childabuseroyalcommission.gov.au/our-work/issues-papers/issues-papers/, accessed January 2014.

Sampson, R.J. & Laub, J.H. (1990) ‘Crime and Deviance over the Life Course: The Salience of Adult Social Bonds’,
American Sociological Review, 55, pp. 609-27.

Seidman, S. (1997) Difference Troubles: Queering Social Theory and Sexual Politics, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

Selvadurai, N., Islam, R. & Gillies, P. (2010) ‘Identity Theft: Aligning Law and Evolving Technologies’, Criminal
Law Journal, 34(1), pp. 33-47.

Smith, R.G. (2008) ‘Coordinating Individual and Organisational Responses to Fraud’, Crime Law and Social
Change, 49, pp. 379-96.

Spark, C. & Harris, A. (2005) ‘Vocation, Vocation: A Study of Prisoner Education for Women’, Journal of Sociology,
41(2), pp. 143-61.

Stoltenborgh, M., van Jzendoorn, M.H., Euser, E.M. & Bakermans-Kranenberg, M.J. (2011) ‘A Global Perspective
on Child Sexual Abuse: Meta-Analysis of Prevalence around the World’, Child Maltreatment, 16(2), pp. 79-101.

Sumner, C. (1994) The Sociology of Deviance: An Obituary, Buckingham, UK, Open University Press.

Sutherland, E.H. (1983) White Collar Crime: The Uncut Version, New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.

Thomas, W.I. (1928) The Child in America: Behavior Problems and Programs, New York, Knopf.

Walker, J. (1997) ‘Estimates of the Costs of Crime in Australia in 1996’, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal
Justice, No. 72, Canberra, Australian Institute of Criminology.

Waters, M. & Crook, R. (1993) Sociology One, 3rd edn, Melbourne, Addison Wesley Longman Australia.

Wearing, B. (1996) Gender: The Pain and Pleasure of Difference, Melbourne, Addison Wesley Longman
Australia.

Weatherburn, D. (2004) Law and Order in Australia: Rhetoric and Reality, Sydney, The Federation Press.

White, R. (1999) ‘Youth Gangs’, in R. White (ed.), Australian Youth Subcultures: On the Margins and in the
Mainstream, Hobart, Australian Clearing House for Youth Studies.

White, R. (2002) ‘Understanding Youth Gangs’, Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice, No. 237,
Canberra, Australian Institute of Criminology.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


232 ( SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

White, R. (2006) ‘Youth Gang Research in Australia’, in J.F. Short, Jr & LA. Hughes (eds), Studying Youth Gangs,
Oxford, Altimira, Ch. 11.

White, R. (2013) Youth Gangs, Violence and Social Respect, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan.

White, R. & Habibis, D. (2005) Crime and Society, South Melbourne, Oxford University Press.

Windle, J. (2008) ‘The Racialization of African Youth in Australia’, Social Identities: Journal for the Study of Race,
Nation and Culture, 14(5), pp. 553-66.

Zevallos, Z. (2006) ‘What Would Durkheim Say? Altruistic Suicide in Analyses of Suicide Terrorism’, Proceedings

of the Australian Sociological Association Annual Conference, University of Western Australia and Murdoch

University, 4-7 December.

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10

THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT

\PTER OUTLINE

® This chapter introduces the sociology of work and employment, looking in particular at
how work is organised in Australia and other modern democracies, and its impact on class,
stratification, inequality and social structure.

®@ It discusses the emergence of a complex division of labour in industrial society, changes
in the organisation of the labour process, and how these changes were understood by
sociologists.

—™@ It introduces key concepts that describe trends in work organisation, such as Taylorism,
Fordism and post-Fordism.

®@ it discusses the emergence of labour movements as social actors, the nature of industrial
relations, and the relationship between work and welfare.

®@ It considers the impact of gender inequality, discrimination and segregation on the
structure of the modern workforce.

© The impact of unemployment, underemployment and workforce change on Australian
society is considered.

® Finally, speculations about the future of work, the possibility of an ‘end of work’ and
different options for reorganising work are discussed.

learning outcomes

LO1 Explain the sociological significance of work
for wider social relations

LO2 Describe how the labour process has evolved
from early industrialisation through to
Fordism and post-Fordism

LO3 Explain the nature of industrial relations and
tensions between workers and employers

LO4 Analyse the evolving role of women in the
labour process and different forms their
struggles for equality have assumed

LOS Assess the future of work and the relevance
of the work ethic

ht © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


t 226 ) AUSTRALIAN SOCIOLOGY: A CHANGING SOCIETY

work

‘Work’ refers to all kinds of
practical activities that satisfy
a variety of needs, while
‘employment’ refers to
remunerated work in either
the formal or informal
economy. See division of
labour, formal economy,
informal economy.

formal economy

The part of the economy,
regulated by law outside the
household economy, that
operates in regulated markets
and/or is controlled by

the state.

informal economy
Parts of the economy that are
Not regulated by law or are
illegal that exist both inside and
outside the household, and in
the market economy.

LO1 Explain the
sociological significance
of work for wider

social relations

industrial society
The set of social relationships
that define a society with
large-scale economic
enterprises, complex
organisations dependent

on modern science and
technology, and a complex
division of labour.

industrial revolution
Dating from the 1780s through
to the 1950s, the industrial
revolution was a period of
massive innovation in the
production of everything from
heavy engineering to consumer
goods. This revolution also saw
the steady movement of
populations into cities, looking
for wage work in factories.

Work occupies a major part of social life and has done so ever since human societies
began to transform their natural environments (Tilgher 1977). While the term ‘work’
is often associated with paid employment, it also describes many other creative and
routine activities that constitute people’s lives. In this chapter, both the terms ‘work’
and ‘labour’ are used interchangeably, and work activities outside the formal
economy—in the informal economy and in the household—are also discussed.

A complex division of labour now shapes the experience of work. This chapter
analyses the transformation of work that has produced this division of labour and
how this affects fundamental aspects of Australian society. We pay particular atten-
tion to the transformation of work organisation over the past few decades. We also
explore the powerful ethical, ideological and technological influences that shape the
experience of work. Furthermore, because a person’s employment status in the labour
market determines many of their opportunities, access to resources and the esteem in
which they are held, sociologists consider the patterns evident in work organisation
to provide important indications of the broader social patterns that constitute class,
stratification and conflict.

@ THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION, THE DIVISION OF LABOUR AND
CLASSICAL SOCIOLOGY

Change and protest

Work is a near-universal human experience, exposing people to the power of institu-
tions and hierarchies beyond family and school. It also provides a ‘map’ of the divi-
sion of labour and social classes.

The emergence of an industrial society brought widespread social changes
(see Chapter 16). From the late 18th century, England started to industrialise, first
developing a textile industry (especially around Manchester), which was later fol-
lowed by the development of other industries such as steel and transport
(Hobsbawm 1962: 27-52). At the same time, displaced agricultural labour began
to migrate to the industrialising cities in search of work. Working conditions in
factories were very poor and the cities were quickly overcrowded, polluted and
diseased (Engels 1976). As a result of this process of industrialisation, the old
feudal class structure began to disintegrate, craft-based work performed by arti-
sans was threatened by new factory organisation, and cities grew in size, wealth,
importance and power. The emergence of Australian manufacturing took place
later than in the leading European nations and the United States. After about
1870, Australia developed a textiles industry, and other light manufacturing and
transportation industries appeared (Markey 1990: 582).

The transformation of work during this industrial revolution had implications
that went far beyond the workplace. The emergence of an industrial working class,
including women and children, who worked long hours in unregulated factories
and spent their lives in slums, produced social unrest (Henriques 1979: 1-9). While

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


CHAPTER 10 THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT t 226 )

wealth produced by the economy grew as production for profit transformed
economic relations, disparities between wage earners and the new class of industrial
employers (often called the ‘bourgeoisie-—see Chapter 2) generated sharp tensions
at work and in politics (see Chapter 11). Wage earners began to form organisations
in order to protect themselves from exploitation (see Polanyi 1957) and these
organisations eventually took the form of modern trade unions. The central dynam-
ics of industrial society revolved around this conflict between employers and organ-
ised labour.

Work and classical sociology

The transformation of work in industrial society captured the attention of many
classical sociologists (whose contributions are discussed in Chapter 16) and other
social thinkers (Offe 1985: 129-50). Karl Marx’s early writings argued that humans
sought to realise their self-development through work. However, the transformation
of the division of labour under capitalism produced low-paid and more routine jobs
that deepened the alienation of working people and thwarted this fulfilment (Marx _ alienation
1974: 97-109; Sayers 1988: 722). Later, in Capital, Marx radicalised the significance ierancementtomthe of
of the claim made by classical political economists (especially Adam Smith and David objective world. in the writings
Ricardo) that labour was the source of economic value by arguing that a portion of fe younydesscwpeteneof
the value generated by productive labour was ‘expropriated’ by capitalists in the form ‘losing control over work
of profit (see Chapter 2). ison
Marx predicted that the major flaws in this capitalist system of work relations
would bring about its demise. For Marx, the use of labour in the capitalist system
involved an essential contradiction. Although labour is the source of capitalists’
wealth, workers are also a cost of production. Capitalists are thus compelled to replace
productive labour with machinery to keep up with competition, but in doing so they
eliminate the ultimate source of their profits. This contradiction produced cyclical
economic crises that beset the capitalist system, which fluctuated between boom and
bust, and between labour shortages and unemployment.
Other classical sociologists made important observations about work. From differ-
ent intellectual perspectives, both Emile Durkheim (1964) and Max Weber (1995)
investigated the division of labour and the transformation of work under capitalism
to underline broader development within modernity. Durkheim’s concept of anomie
(see Chapter 16) shares some similarities with Marx’s idea of alienation and he used
the idea of anomie to explain conflicts produced by the division of labour. He also
stressed that conflict stemmed from the ‘forced’ nature of industrial change, which
adversely affected workers’ jobs and morale (Durkheim 1964: 374-88).
Max Weber (see Chapters 2 and 16) also gave central importance to the changes in
work organisation in his insights into modernity. In The Protestant Ethic and the
Spirit of Capitalism, Weber attempted to account for the emergence of modern
capitalism by giving particular emphasis to the shift in values that preceded the emer-
gence of modern life. For Weber, the origins of a culture based on hard work (or a

Copyright © Pearson Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 2015 — 9781486003310 - Holmes/Australian Sociology 4e


